"Come on, Nielson, try it again."

Peter bit his lower lip and dribbled the basketball clumsily across the
floor. As he leapt at the hoop the ball slipped in his hand and hit the
underside of the backboard, bouncing away as he landed awkwardly.

Mr. Thompson sighed. "Okay. Zero for ten, Nielson. Must be a bad day,
right? Who's next?" Peter didn't look at the gym teacher as he took his
place at the back of the line.

Later, in the showers, David Wulchinski shouted, "Hey, guys, it's Doctor
Dunk! Just a bad day, right, Nielson?" Wulchinski laughed, and a couple
of guys laughed with him. Peter had learned long ago to keep quiet. He
tried to shower as quickly as he could.

He was standing in front of the locker room's one mirror, trying to see
himself well enough to comb his hair past the backs of the two boys in
front of him, when somebody grabbed him from behind. He squawked and
tried to turn around as a strong arm reached down the back of his pants
and grabbed his underwear. Indignation turned to pain as Wulchinski
pulled the white jockey shorts hard enough to bring the waistband up
into the small of Peter's back. Amidst the laughter of his classmates he
tucked the underwear back under his pants and fled.

The only good thing about gym class, he reflected, was that Physics was
right after it. Maybe not the only thing, he amended, as Christine Ball,
generally acknowledged to be the best-looking girl in the eleventh
grade, bumped into him.

"'Scuse me," she said. "Oh, hi, Peter."

"Hi, Chris. How's it going?" He slung his Adidas bag over his shoulder
and tried to look cool.

"Not bad." Christine started to step past him, then stopped and giggled.
"Hey, Peter, it's reckless, but I don't think it's going to catch on."
Hot-faced, he tucked the last corner of his underwear into his pants and
hurried off to class.

Peter always enjoyed Physics. Mr. McCleary, always dressed in the same
brown sports jacket with worn leather elbow patches, was only a couple
of years away from retirement, and had once told Peter, when the boy had
shown up to class in tears after a particularly bad run-in with what Mr.
McCleary called "the barbarians", that Peter was the best student he'd
had in forth-eight years of teaching. Of the twelve students in the
class, Peter was the only one who'd managed to answer all the questions
for that day's homework assignment.

The euphoria didn't last. It never did. He was standing at his locker
getting his books for English when somebody grabbed his green-and-white
Physics text out of his hands and an all-too-familiar voice said, "Hey,
everybody, watch this!"

David Wulchinski stepped back, then leapt up and dropped the book onto
Peter's head. "I'm Doctor Dunk!" he howled. "Basketball superstar of the
eighties!"

Peter picked up his book and put it carefully in his locker, pulled his
English books out, closed the locker, and then swung around and slammed
the books into Wulchinski's face. The older boy fell backwards onto the
floor. Peter set off at a run.

He could hear Wulchinski shouting behind him as they raced through B
Corridor. Peter ducked into C Corridor, and suddenly could move no
further as a mob of grade eights swarmed out of class. He was trying to
push his way through when Wulchinski caught up to him.

He was late getting to English, and spent the whole hour trying not to
think about his sides and stomach, where Wulchinski had punched him.
"You little smart-ass suck, you can't even run away right, can you?"
Wulchinski's voice echoed in his head all afternoon.

He was walking home by himself, as usual, when he decided, Why not?, and
stepped into Lucifer's.

The video arcade had been open only a few months, and was never more
than half-full. Peter looked around to make sure there were no
barbarians in the place before going up to the counter to get change.

Nobody knew the name of the old man who ran the place. Nobody had ever
seen him anywhere except behind the counter near the door, dispensing
quarters. Sometimes Peter preteneded that the old man was a death-camp
survivor; other times, he was a Russian agent who had defected and
wanted to spend the rest of his life in a quiet, nowhere place. He
always wore the same stocking cap pulled down low over his ears, and,
although Peter had never seen him smoke, always smelled like matches.

"Four, please," Peter asked. Gnarled, stained fingers dug four quarters
from the pouch in the dun-coloured apron and dropped them one at a time
into the boy's palm, then plucked the single bill from the tabetop and
tucked it away.

Peter dropped his first quarter in the Acceleration game. An electronic
trumpet flourished, and then he was piloting a fighter

through a field of gravity-warp mines, trying to avoid enemy missiles as
he destroyed bright blue ships.

"Should've kicked him," he muttered, squeezing the controls until his
knuckles were white. "Should've tripped him when he came around the
corner. Gutless, Nielson, just gutless." He punched the side of the
machine as a missile clipped the corner of his fighter and ended the
round.

"How's it going, Chris?" he mimicked savagely. "Brilliant, Nielson. Get
on television with lines like that." The second fighter flared and
faded. He wiped his hands on his pants and licked his lips.

The third fighter died almost as soon as it appeared. A little dirge
played, and the message appeared on the screen. Peter reached into his
pocket.

"Hey, kid." He looked over his shoulder. The old man was beckoning at
him.

"Sir?" he asked.

"Why don't you try that one, in the corner." The old man pointed at an
unspectacular single-control game standing off by itself.

Peter went over to it and wiped dust doubtfully from the screen. "It
looks kind of old," he said.

The old man coughed, or laughed. "It was the first game they made, kid.
Go ahead. If you win the first time it's on the house."

Peter shrugged and put a quarter in the slot. The screen flickered, and
abruptly filled with a picture of a rocket flying through a bunch of
rectangular green-and-white shapes. Peter grabbed the control and
started firing.

There was a pattern, he decided after a few moments. The things would
swarm about, then group together and charge him. Each time they came
closer and closer, until their geen-and-white markings loomed huge on
the screen as they rushed past.

He dodged past a final wave and was suddenly in the clear. At the top of
the screen the message flashed, and a bright orange ball appeared. He
swung the ship in line with it and scooped it up effortlessly. A bell
sounded, and flashed.

The targets in the next wave were faster, and harder to hit. This time
when his shots hit connected the things flapped like books thrown into
the wind before fading away. He blasted through the first three squads,
picking up the ball each time, but was hit and died on the fourth.

"Not bad," the old man allowed. "Here." He reached into his apron and
pulled out a quarter. "Like I said, game's on the house."

Peter looked at his watch. "Jesus Christ! I was supposed to be home a
half an hour ago!"

"Hey!" The old man's voice had a hard edge in it. "Don't swear in here,
kid. Not like that."

Peter apologized incoherently as he grabbed his books and fled.

That night, instead of looking over the Physics homework for the next
day, he sat down in front of the television. After an hour or so his
brother Joey came in and sat down beside him. "What's on, Pete?" he
asked.

Peter shrugged. He'd asked his parents once, after a particularly
interesting health class, whether Joey was a mistake. His father had
smiled and said, "Actually, Peter, you were the mistake."

"What'd you do today, shrub?" he asked, stugging another handful of cold
popcorn into his mouth.

"Not much," Joey said. "Practised. I just about got that piece done."

"Oh yeah?" Peter like listening to his brother play piano almost as much
as he liked Physics. "You gonna play it for me sometime, or do I wait
'til you got a record out or something?"

"Gee, I dunno," Joey seemed to think very seriously. "I guess maybe you
could come and listen." Peter put a final handful of popcorn into his
mouth and helped Joey get up. He walked slowly, careful to keep pace
with his brother's painful progress. When they got into the music room
Joey put down his canes and opened up one of the books lying on the
piano. 'Mozart', Peter read. 'I wonder who he was?' The light, clean
strains of a piano sonata filled the basement room.

The next day he made sure that he got down into the locker room before
anyone else did, and was changed and up sitting on the gym floor before
David Wulchinski arrived. Mr. Thompson came over to him.

"Think you'll have a better day today, Nielson?" the gym teacher asked.

"I dunno," Peter said. "Are we doing basketball again today?" Thompson
nodded.

"Sure are. Listen, it's got to be better than yesterday, right?"
Thompson reached down and punched the boy lightly in the shoulder.

Other boys began to filter in and pick basketballs out of the box by the
office, throwing them back and forth or dribbling them up and dunking
them in the hoop. Peter sat on the floor, watching.

Eventually David Wulchinski showed up, wearing jean shorts and a Judas
Priest t-shirt. "Hey, Dunk," he said, loudly enough that the other boys
around them could hear. "Gonna show us some hot stuff today?" Nielson
shrugged again.

Mr. Thompson took them through their warm-ups quickly, then paired them
off and had them practice passing and blocking. After twenty minutes of
that he whistled and lined the boys up for shooting practise. Peter went
to the end of the line.

He watched as one by one the boys in front of him ran forward. When
Wulchinski's turn came he over-stepped his mark and put the ball in with
a contortionist's leap from behind, earning a "Good shot, Wulchinski,"
from Thompson.

Finally Peter's turn came. Thompson handed him the ball with a sour
grin. "Go ahead, Nielson. Don't worry if you can't put it in, just give
it your best shot."

Peter took a deep breath and planted both of his feet firmly.

"Well, take a run at it, at least," Thompson said. "You're not going to
put it in from halfway across the floor."

"Hey, don't worry, Mr. Thompson. He's Doctor Dunk. He can do anything."
Some boys laughed.

"When I want your opinion, Wulchinski, I'll tell you what it is. Go
ahead, Nielson." Thompson crossed his arms.

Peter exhaled slowly, stepped forward, and pushed the ball into the air.
It floated like a bird soaring, then dove and plopped! cleanly through
the hoop.

There was a moment's awed silence. "Lord thundering Jesus," Mr. Thompson
finally said. "Where the hell'd you learn to do that, Nielson?"

Peter shrugged. "I dunno." He walked to the end of the line. When he
went past David Wulchinski he looked straight into the other boy's eyes,
clenching his fists by his side.

A half an hour later, after an unmolested shower, he was sitting in
Physics class, apologizing to Mr. McCleary for not having done his
homework. "I was really tired last night, sir," he said, uneasy at
telling the lie.

Mr. McCleary looked at him closely, frowning with his bushy white
eyebrows. "Are you feeling all right, Peter?" he asked. You can get a
note from the nurse and go home for the day if you want."

Nielson shook his head. "I'm okay. Just haven't been getting enough
sleep, I guess." Mr. McCleary nodded and wiggled his eyebrows a bit
more, then went on with the class.

That afternoon Peter hestitated outside Lucifer's door on the way home,
then stuck his hands deep in his pockets and walked past.

The rest of the week went by quickly. He did the missed homework that
night, as well as assignments and bonus questions for the next two
classes, all the while remembering, glorying in, the sight of the
basketball dropping through the hoop, and the silence that had followed.
Especially, he remembered the questioning look in Wulchinski's eyes as
he'd walked past.

Friday afternoon was the last gym class of the week. Mr. Thompson took
them through a brief series of warmups, and then split them into two
teams for a game. As usual, Peter was the second-to-last picked, just
ahead of John Nhe, the Vietnamese kid who just stood there and held onto
the ball whenever it was put in his hands.

Five minutes into the game, the boys in the gym knew that something had
changed. Peter Nielson was moving across the floor like a professional,
untouchable in offense and unavoidable in defense. He scored forty
points in his first game, sinking the ball easily from anywhere in the
court.

Players rotated on and off, so that Peter only got ten minutes at a
time. He was going out for the last time when some of the girls doing
gymnastics in the other half of the gym came over to sit with the boys
waiting to go on.

"Hey, Peter, you're playing pretty well," Christine said. Nielson
flushed slightly.

"Okay, I guess," he said, clearing his throat to cover a slight break.
"How's it going with you?"

"Hey, Peter, you're out!" Nielson stood hurriedly and stumbled onto the
court. The ball went into the air and was passed towards the opposing
team's left side. Without thinking Peter stepped forward and plucked it
out of the air, dribbled it past a surprised defender and twisted up to
backboard it into the hoop. From the sidelines he heard a few
high-pitched voices cheering.

He got the ball again on the second start, and was taking it down the
court when something hard and heavy slammed into him. The whistle blew,
and somebody helped him to his feet. David Wulchinski was standing a few
feet away, head bowed, listening to Mr. Thompson chew him out and call
the penalty. Nielson limped back into place.

The ball came to his own side, and his center man passed it to Peter.
Just as quickly he tossed it back. "Little suck," Wulchinski hissed,
trotting past him. "I'll get you." Peter swallowed and let play move
away from him.

Later, as he headed down to the locker room, Christine said, "Hey,
Peter, that was some shot."

"Thanks," he mumbled. "I guess it's my lucky day , or something."

Wulchinski was waiting for him.

He limped toward home, trying not to breath so that he wouldn't start
crying, because if he didn't breath his ribs and sides didn't hurt. He
didn't hesitate in front of the door to Lucifer's.

The old man was sitting there, as still and as watchful as ever. "One,"
Peter asked, putting his bill down.

"Nope." The old man shook his head. "You still got a game I owe you.
Here." He handed Peter a quarter. "Go try it again. You're doing pretty
well."

Peter put his books down beside the machine and pushed the coin into the
slot. Once again, the screen flickered, then solidified.

They weren't books this time, waiting to be shot down. Instead, he was a
knight on a white horse, hacking with a sword at the hundreds of
laughing little gnomes that swarmed at him. He charged back and forth
across the field, laying waste to whole regiments of goblins in brown
jackets with elbow patches. As he rode them down the would turn their
bald heads and their ridiculous bushy eyebrows would jerk up and down in
comic fear. Peter gritted his teeth as he slaughtered them.

Suddenly there were no more goblins. flashed as the top of the screen,
and a heavilybuilt, blond-haired goblin came stumbling forward, swing an
ax.

"Eat me," Peter grunted, and charged. His lance passed cleanly through
the goblin chief, and trumpets sounded as the monster died.

He spent Friday night in front of the television, taking an hour's break
when Dallas came on to listen to Joey, then set up the Atari machine and
played some baseball with his younger brother. His father watched in
amusement from his overstuffed chair.

"You'd better watch out, Peter," he finally said. "Joe's going to be
better than you pretty soon now."

Peter barked. "Hah! I'm the best there ever was! I'm like, I'm like the
Mozart of video games." His father laughed.

Monday, another gym class. For the first time in his life Peter Nielson
wasn't tripping over his own feet. Some of the guys in the class were
even starting to call him Doctor Dunk and mean it. He felt a warm glow
every time he put the ball into the hoop. Instead of just shrugging he
raised his hands over his head in a victory salute, or bowed like a
movie star to the rest of the class. The one time that he came anywhere
near David Wulchinski he just smiled when the other boy promised to do
something obscene to him.

He felt like Charles Bronson as he walked down to the locker room after
class. David Wulchinski was already there, sitting in his shorts.

"Hey guys, it's the suck. Hey, suck, where'd you learn to play
basketball, sucking up Tom Thumb after class? Hey, you two good bum
buddies or something?" The whole locker room was quiet, listening to
Wulchinski's hard voice.

Peter Nielson pulled off one running shoe. "Wulshitski," he said
pleasantly, "You're an asshole. A real asshole."

Somebody said, "Uh oh," and David Wulshinski clenched his fists. "Think
you're pretty fucking tough just 'cause you can play basketball, don't
you, suck?" He stepped into the middle of the locker room. "Why'n't you
show me how tough you are?"

Peter pulled off the other running shoe. "Because I don't think you'd be
able to understand, Wulshitski," he said, in the same pleasant tone.
"You'd need to have a brain to understand." Peter stood up and
stretched.

Wulchinski charged at him from across the room. Peter stooped and
grabbed one end of the bench he'd been sitting on and pulled it up into
the bigger boy's knees. There was a sharp *crack!* as Wulchinski's shins
and the wood connected. Peter dropped the bench, stepped daintily over
the howling bully, and kicked him in the crotch.

"Jesus thundering Christ!" Thompson shouted at him, five minutes later,
in the office. "You've never caused any trouble before, Nielson. What
got into your head this time?"

Peter shrugged. "I dunno. I just wasn't going to to let him push me
around any more. How come you never hauled him in here when he beat up
on me?"

Thompson glowered. "It would've helped it you'd told me about it,
wouldn't it?" He sighed. "Okay. Detention for today, note to your
parents. I guess maybe you deserved this one. But next time something
like this happens, you're really going to know I'm mad. Okay?"

Peter got down off the stool and walked out without saying a word.
Thompson stared at his retreating back and shook his head.

He waited for Christine to catch up with him. "Let me guess," he said.
"You want help with your Algebra again." He slung the Adidas bag over
his shoulder and leaned against the wall.

Christine looked at him puzzledly. "No, I just heard about what you did
to David. I think it's great somebody finally gave him what he
deserved."

Peter smiled. "Yeah, so do I. Hey, what're you doing Friday night? *Star
Wars* is on again downtown, I thought maybe..." he trailed off as she
shook her head.

"I've got a boyfriend, Peter; I think he's taking me out to a restaurant
or something Friday. Thanks anyway. Hey, listen, it was really great,
okay?" She smiled at him and hurried away. Peter stared at her
retreating back for a few moments, then swore and kicked the wall.

He was late getting to Physics class. Mr. McCleary looked up in surprise
as he walked in.

"I was just about ready to send the dogs out to look for you," he said.

"Yeah, well, I'm here now, right?" Peter dropped his bag beside his seat
and threw himself into it.

Mr. McCleary looked at him almost in fear. "Peter, are you sure you're
all right?"

"Yeah, I'm all right."

The bushy eyebrows frowned. "Don't use that tone of voice with me, young
man. We're just going over the assignment. Do you have question number
two done?"

Peter half-reached into his bag, checked himself. "No," he admitted. "I
didn't get around to it."

Mr. McCleary start at him, his clear blue eyes burning. "All weekend,
and you didn't get around to it? This is most unusual." There was a long
silence. Somebody else in the class whispered something, and the
listener tried not to giggle.

Finally McCleary dropped his eyes. "Well, then, does anyone else have
question nuber two done?" He didn't ask Peter for anything for the rest
of the class.

Peter went straight to Lucifer's after school.

"You gotta pay for this one yourself," the old man warned. Peter nodded
and went straight to the old machine; he'd saved a quarter from his
lunch money.

This time it was a racing car, tearing through the city streets. Points
were given for hitting other cars, or pedestrians, with bonus points for
police cars and ambulances and things like that.

The first target hobbled jerkily onto the screen. He swerved and hit it
from behind. In the distance he could see a small cartoon figure,
impossibly curvaceous, beckoning. The prize was waving now; cheering
sounds came from the machine as the third stick-man, bigger than the
others, better drawn, tried to run from him onto the sidewalk. He had to
make a hard right turn to avoid a fire hydrant. As he hit the target its
head turned.

"Oh my God!" he exclaimed as Joey's face opened wide in fear before
disappearing under his wheels. A sound almost like pain came from the
desk behind him.

He let go of the control in horror. "Finish the game!" the old man
shouted. "You gotta finish the game!" Peter reached up and clutched the
cold control stick.

He tried not to look at the fourth stick man as he ran it down. Of its
own volition the car slowed and the woman stepped in. The screen faded
to black.

"You're doing well, kid," the old man said as he left. Peter swallowed
and didn't reply.

That night, after supper, he said to Joey, "Hey, you want to go and play
me something?"

His brother shook his head. "No, I don't think so. I'm kinda tired."

"Joseph!" their father exclaimed. "I've never heard you turn down a
chance to play before!"

The little boy started to cry. "That's all I ever do, is play piano. I
wanna play basketball like Peter!" Peter watched, horrified, as their
mother swept into the room and hugged Joey close, shooting him an angry
look.

He stood up suddenly. "Well, don't look at me," he said. "I didn't do
nothing."

"Peter!" his father snapped. "Don't talk to your mother that way. What's
all this about basketball?"

A half an hour later, having explained to his father that he was
starting to do well in gym, and that Mr. Thompson was just playing
favourites, and that no, he hadn't done his Physics homework (did
teachers ever do anything but phone parents, he wondered), he was
getting kind of tired of Physics all the time, and apologizing to his
mother (under duress), he lay on his bed, staring at the ceiling. From
the basement he heard the sounds of music being started, then stopped,
then started again. Then he heard what might have been crying. He rolled
over and pulled the pillow over his head.

The next day, when he was sitting in the cafeteria, Christine came up
and sat down across from him. "Guess what?"

"You want to go see *Star Wars* Friday night," Peter said.

She looked at him in amazement. "How'd you guess? Michael and I broke up
last night. He was such a jerk, anyway. Yeah, I'd love to go out Friday
night." They spent the rest of lunch hour and part of the class after,
which was only Geography) sitting there, talking.

He went three weeks without going into Lucifer's. In that time, he
managed to accumulate five detentions for getting into fights, and to do
only one Physics assignment, and that poorly. He spent almost every
night with Christine and her friends. He stopped saying hello to John
Nhe in the corridors. And neither he nor Joey mentioned the piano.

On that last Friday he was summoned into the principal's office.

"What's got into you in the last month, Peter?" the principal asked.
"You used to be the best student this school had. Now, every time I turn
around, somebody tells me you've been fighting again. Even Mr. McCleary
has complained about your attitude in class."

"What does he know?\" Peter muttered.

"I beg your pardon?" the principal asked. "What did you say, young man?"

"Nothin'," Peter said sulkily. "I don't ever say nothin'."

The principal pursed his lips. "You know that we were intending to
recommend you for a university scholarship for next year, you know."

Peter looked up at him and shook his head. The principal nodded.

"Oh yes, we were going to. But if you continue to behave like this,
Peter, well, for one thing your marks are certainly suffering. And I
don't see how we could recomment you over that refugee boy, May or
whatever his name is, if you don't start behaving."

"What am I supposed to do?" Peter asked plaintively. "I didn't start any
of those fights. I'm just not gonna let anyone pick on me anymore."

"There's a difference between not being picked on and behaving as though
you belonged to Hell's Angels." The principal seemed to weigh something
in his mind. "I suppose I shouldn't be asking this, but are you really
seeing Christine Ball these days?"

"Yeah," Peter said. "She's my girlfriend. Is there anything wrong with
that?"

The principal's jaw tightened. "I've had just about enough of that from
you, Mr. Nielson. She's started crying in class a few times in the last
few weeks. I gather she's not entirely happy about something. You
wouldn't know anything about that, would you?"

"Well, she's only a girl," Peter replied. "What do you expect?"

The principal shook his head. "It's enough to make even a good skeptic
like myself believe in possession," he said to no-one in particular.
"All right, you can go. But," he added as Peter slided to his feet, "If
there's one more complaint against you before the end of term I'm going
to have you expelled. I mean it, Peter. I'm not going to let you be a
bad influence on the rest of this school."

He knew he was supposed to go straight back to Chemistry. He knew that.
Instead, he threw his books into his locker, shrugged on his jacket, and
slipped out through the fire-escape doors.

Lucifer's was open. Somehow, Peter knew that Lucifer's was always open.
He had a half-dozen quarters in his pockets that he'd stolen from his
mother's purse.

"I though I'd lost you," the old man said as Peter stomped in. "She's
right over there," he added needlessly as the boy dropped his jacket on
the floor and put his piece of silver in the machine.

A rocket ship again, this one big and covered in detailed like the one
from Alien. He was cruising through space, waiting.

"Shit," he finally said. "When does it start? Oh, hey, sorry about
swearing."

The old man cackled. "That wasn't swearing," he said. "That was just
cussing. You can cuss all you like. Look out!"

Peter gripped the control and started firing. He could see all the
targets clearly now. Books, calculators, big old buildings that looked
like the ones in the Princeton picture his dad had up on his wall, his
own house, faces of people, his dad, his mom, Joey, Mr. McCleary,
thousands of girls and women he'd seen at some time or another, whole
cities of people, Albert Einstein, a man's face with a look of pain and
a gentle silver glow around it, big churches and Space Shuttles and
thousands of other things. He growled and swore as he clasted away,
little red missiles flashing like anger across the screen.

"Peter!" A hand grabbed his shoulder. He glanced sideways.

"Whaddaya want, I'm busy," he growled, twisting the control with all his
might to avoid a swooping Mona Lisa before blowing it into a thousand
bright flashes.

"Peter...what are you doing?" Mr. McCleary tried to pull the boy around.

Peter elbowed him aside. "I'm playing, whaddaya think I'm doing? Why
don't you just leave me alone?"

Charles Stuart McCleary looked at the dark, empty screen in confusion.
"Playing?" he asked. "Peter, there's nothing there! Come on, let's go
back to the school."

"Hey, you," the old man shouted. "You get outa here. I don't let anyone
molest my customers. I run a legal shop here, everything by the rules.
You wanna play something, you buy some quarters. You don't wanna play,
you get out." McCleary looked back and forth between the two, then, his
eyes brimming, turned and walked out slowly.

In front of the machine Peter pulled back on the control stick as the
targets disappeared. He wiped his free hand on his shirt and took a deep
breath. A pinkish blob began to fill the screen. He dodged around it,
circling, waiting. the screen commanded. His thumb came down; a single
red missile flew.

It was only then that he was that the last target was his own face.
