# The Bookster's Apprentice

## Greg Wilson

*Take a squat pyramid of rock, seven gallops long, four wide, and a
gallop high. Lift it into the air, then tilt it back like an old man
looking up at a rooftop, so that its forward edge rises gently to the
central peak, while its trailing edge drops so steeply that only goats,
birds, and a small village called Aft Landing can find a foothold. Put a
town of some ten thousand souls on its leading edge, and smaller towns
(not villages---their inhabitants are quite definite about that) on its
flanks; bash its underside against stationary mountains until it's
ragged, and let rain, snow, and windblown sand weather it for a few
thousand years. That is Avaunt.*

*Now put it in motion. Eight months north from Mau Ngapcha to Normous
Berth, with half the world's chocolate in its warehouses, and no small
part of its cinnamon, cloves, silk, and bamboo. Two weeks on the ground,
while traders from all over northern Cherne elbow past each other to
make their bargains, and then another eight months in the air with iron,
wool, amber, and furs for the south.*

*When the Uncertain Angels ruled the world, Avaunt was a place where a
party might last a lifetime. After they destroyed themselves, its
inhabitants were young magicians in search of the Angels' lost power and
wild-eyed tinkers with a fascination for clockwork. They called
themselves the Hett, and as the years passed, the nations beneath them
came to regard them with growing suspicion. Eventually, an ambitious
young prince with few prospects at home decided to do more than mutter.
The next time Avaunt landed at Normous Berth, the rag-tag army he had
recruited attacked. Many of the Hett were slain outright; the rest were
driven off the mountain with nothing but the clothes on their backs. It
was barely spring, and bitterly cold; few survived.*

*The Hett's treasure turned out to consist of scrap iron and tattered
books no one knew how to read. Undeterred, the prince retitled himself
the Captain of Avaunt, made his lieutenants bosuns, and gave the Hett's
houses and farms to his followers. Most of them smoked, drank, or
gambled away their gifts, but the rest settled down to trade, raise
families, and watch the world slip past beneath them.*

*Now, look closer. There, in Starboard Town. Five hundred years have
passed; it is Redsday, the 11^th^ of Peridot, 1261. A boy who is just
starting to think of himself as a man has woken up on what will turn out
to be the last day of his childhood... *

Sunshine meant it was morning. Morning meant Piaerre had to get out of
bed. He rubbed the grit from his eyes and rolled over, luxuriating in a
last few moments of warmth.

The gumminess in his mouth told him he had read past midnight once
again. The book responsible sat on the stool beside his low-framed bed;
the thumb-sized piece of dayglass that had been his nightlight when he
was little lay on top of it, still glowing faintly with the remains of
the previous day's sunlight.

He yawned enormously and sat up, wrapping the quilt around his
shoulders. Vaszlav would arrive soon, if he wasn't already in his usual
spot outside Mamaere Mayeule's. Piaerre groped under the quilt for his
pants and shirt and slipped them on, then slipped the book he'd borrowed
on the peddler's previous visit into his satchel and went downstairs as
quietly as he could.

"Morning," his father Laeuc said.

"Morning," Piaerre said, yawning again. His father had already been up
for an hour, carving fine curlicue details on the shaft of a bamboo
flute.

"Going up to see Vaszlav?"

"Mm." Piaerre eyed the heel of potato bread that lay forgotten on a
plate at his father's elbow. "Are you going to eat that?"

"No, go ahead." Laeuc scored a quarter circle in the flute, then held it
up and squinted at it critically. "Don't forget you have to finish the
fence today."

"I won't." Slipping the bread into his pocket, Piaerre headed out the
front door.

He stood there blinking for a moment in the sharp light of the mountain
morning. It was earlier than he'd thought---Slip Street was almost empty.
He was tempted to go back to bed, or to sit and watch his father carve,
but then he heard a rooster crow from Armaend and Donaien's yard.
Suddenly aware that he would be spending yet another afternoon indoors,
he took a deep breath. Wood smoke, the tang of pine, and a hint of
spring...

Slip Street ran the length of Starboard Town, as crooked as a dropped
piece of string. It was paved from top to bottom with rounded gray
cobblestones, each as large as Piaerre's two hands put together. Weeding
them was the bosun's favorite punishments for minor offenses. Piaerre
had pulled up more burlicks and snowdelions than most of Starboard
Town's children, usually while muttering, "But I didn't mean to," under
his breath.

Sturdy wooden railings stood guard at the street's sharp bends to catch
runaway handcarts. A pulley post stood at the top of each straight
stretch, for those times when someone needed to haul a load of firewood
or a new couch up the mountain.

The houses crowded together on either side of the street had steep
roofs, for the snows of northern winters, and large shuttered windows,
to let in the breeze during the hot southern summers. Their whitewashed
walls were spackled with brightly-painted doors, each unique: orange and
gray, blue and red, a diamond pattern of black on gold. A man-tall door
soldier made of wood and straw stood guard beside each, each in a
carefully-mended uniform whose colors matched those of the door. Every
storyteller on the mountain had a different explanation for the custom;
all anyone really knew was that they made them because their
grandparents' grandparents had.

Above the narrow street flew the town's kites, each tethered to a
chimney. The townspeople launched them when the mountain left Mau
Ngapcha, with wishes written on their bamboo cross-struts. A few had
already fallen, or been blown away by storms, but most still dipped and
swayed in the steady breeze of the mountain's northward journey.

Piaerre touched two fingers to his lips and pointed them at the blue,
orange, and yellow paper diamond holding station downwind from his
chimney. "Next year in Ensworth," he whispered. Next year in the
greatest school in the world, surrounded by books and scholars, a place
where no one thought you were strange if you knew what "loquacious"
meant...

A cream-and-chocolate goat bleated at Piaerre from a nearby rooftop,
then lowered its head to nibble the moss between its feet. Two startled
irvings fluttered away from it like leaves in a sudden hurricane,
returning a heartbeat later to peck at the goat's leavings. Hitching his
satchel's strap higher on his shoulder, Piaerre ambled up the street
toward Mamaere Mayeule's.

Vaszlav was just starting to set up when Piaerre arrived. "Clear day,
young *sra*," the old Hett tinker puffed, slipping his heavy pack off
his shoulders and touching his hairline respectfully.

"'Day, Vaszlav," Piaerre replied. "Did you find the other Farberre
book?"

"Ah, that..." Vaszlav raised and lowered his shoulders in an apologetic
shrug. "I found it, but the fellow said it wasn't for loan. Offered him
half a quarter-ring, like you said, and promised he'd get the full worth
of it if there was so much as a smudge on the back page, but he said it
was the only copy he had."

"Oh." Downcast, but also somewhat relieved that he wouldn't have to
spend a week's wages on something he would probably read in a single
evening, Piaerre watched as the old man took apart his pack's bamboo
frame with a speed born of long practice.

He turned at the sound of footsteps on the cobblestones to find a second
Hett standing behind him. "Clear day," Piaerre said politely.

The Hett nodded. "And to you." He was younger than Vaszlav---perhaps in
his twenties, or early thirties. Where the older Hett was wiry, the
newcomer looked as sturdy as a cart ox, with the top two buttons of his
shirt undone, and a sleeveless vest over top of it instead of the full
coat that Vaszlav wore no matter what weather the mountain was flying
through. His sandy hair and gray-blue eyes were as unremarkable as his
homespun clothes, but there was a stillness about him that unsettled
Piaerre.

"Ah." Vaszlav cleared his throat. "This is Jaromir, my new apprentice.
And this *sra* is Piaerre Elaiene Ã© Laeuc, the most voracious reader on
Avaunt."

The Hett nodded. It was definitely a nod, not Vaszlav's deferential dip
of the head. "Shall I set up here?" he asked the older Hett.

"As you like," Vaszlav grunted. He handed his apprentice two pieces of
bamboo. "Here. Idiot things must have warped with the wet. See if you
can sort them out."

A small knot of people gathered while the two Hett put Vaszlav's stall
together and set out his wares, each explaining to the next who Jaromir
was. Bored, Piaerre counted the cobblestones beneath his feet. Two,
four, six... eighteen, twenty---Slip Street was twenty cobblestones wide. He
frowned, wondering suddenly how many there were on the whole street. His
papaere or the bookster would have helped him figure it out. Not the
townspeople around him, though---they would just roll their eyes and trade
amused looks with each other.

Or worse. His stomach sank as he saw Fraederiq and Niquolas coming
toward him. They had been friends of a sort when they were younger, but
then Fraederiq's mother had run off, intoxicated (some said) by the
whispered poetry of a Bantangui cinnamon merchant, and weary of her
husband's endless thirst for argument. Now sixteen, Fraederiq hadn't
just grown taller and stronger. He'd grown angry, too, angry at the
whole world. As always, Niquolas had followed suit, rolling up his
sleeves the way Fraederiq did, throwing stones when Fraederiq threw
them, and sneering at whatever stirred the older boy's displeasure that
day.

As the only other boy their age in Starboard Town, and with a head full
of odd facts, Piaerre was resigned to being their favorite target.
Lately, though, it had almost seemed as if Fraederiq was trying to be
nice to him. That worried Piaerre more than the surreptitious trippings
and knucklings he'd grown used to. He sidled behind Armaend and Donaien,
who were lost in one of their interminable arguments about cooking, but
it was too late.

"Day." Fraederiq's greeting was just a grunt.

"Day." Piaerre stuck his hands in his pockets. The less he said...

Fraederiq jerked his chin at Vaszlav's stall. "Anything better than the
usual junk this time?"

*How should I know?* Piaerre thought. *I didn't set it up.* He shrugged.
"I dunno."

Fraederiq's eyes narrowed. "Who's he?" he asked, pointing.

"Vaszlav's apprentice."

"Huh. Another newcomer. My paere says there's too many new Hett on the
mountain."

Piaerre shrugged again. Fraederiq's father, Gaeston, said many things,
few of them kind.

He was saved from having to think of another noncommittal answer by the
ringing of Vaszlav's chime. "Clear day, good morning, *mingala ba*," he
said, as he always did. "Please, good *sra*, how many I help you today?"

Piaerre cast a quick eye over the odds and ends on display. There was
nothing he hadn't seen before. As he turned to go, Fraederiq caught his
arm. He stiffened, waiting for a knuckle-twist in his ribs. Instead,
Fraederiq nodded brusquely at Vaszlav's shelves. "What do you think of
that barrette?" he asked.

"What?"

"That barrette," Fraederiq repeated impatiently. "Think it's any good?
My paere says a lot of what he sells is junk."

Bemused, Piaerre looked at the little hair clip. It didn't look like
much of anything to him, just two fingers of polished wood held together
by a bent tin spring. "Looks all right to me," he said.

"I think it's junk," Niquolas sneered.

Fraederiq silenced him with a look. "You think someone like Chaentelle
would like it?"

Piaerre blinked. "Um... I don't know," he said weakly.

Fraederiq scowled. "Come on. You've got a sister, you ought to know."

Piaerre shrugged helplessly. Yes, he had a sister, but sharing a house
with QueÃ§enne didn't mean he knew how she *thought*, much less what her
best friend Chaentelle would and wouldn't like. "I don't know," he
repeated. "Why don't you ask her?" *Or jump off the mountain,* he added
to himself jealously. Chaentelle probably hadn't said ten words to
Piaerre since the mountain left Mau Ngapcha, but that didn't mean he
hadn't been paying attention to her. Especially on laundry days, when
steam made the old cotton shift of her mother's that she worked in cling
to her in ways that Piaerre found increasingly disturbing...

"Pfah. You're useless." Fraederiq let go of his arm and stepped around
Armaend and Donaien, who were still arguing about the best way to chop
onions when making curry. "How much is that?" he asked Vaszlav, pointing
at the barrette.

"This?" Vaszlav picked it up and handed it to Fraederiq. "It's quite the
pretty, isn't it? Thindi, not Bantangui---on my blood, that's real
mahogany. I could let you have it for, mm, three quarter rings and two
pence."

"What? For this trash?" Fraederiq scowled. "It's not worth half that.
Here." He pulled a string of coins out of his pocket, untied it, and
held out a pair of quarter-ring coins. "I'll give you half a ring for
it, how's that?"

Vaszlav spread his hands helplessly. "I am sorry, *sra*, but I cannot. I
paid three quarter rings for it myself, and---"

"What about goods in trade?" Niquolas interrupted. He elbowed Fraederiq.
"We've been doing some carving, haven't we? We figure they'll fetch half
a ring each. Give you three now, that's..." He paused, his fingers moving
against his trouser leg.

"A ring and a half," Piaerre supplied helpfully, raising his hands a
heartbeat later to fend off a double glare from the other two boys.

As Vaszlav started to reply, Jaromir stilled him with a hand on his arm.
"What kind of carvings these are?" he asked.

Niquolas glanced around. "Heads," he said conspiratorially. "For door
soldiers. We're making them out of coconut shells. They're really
scary---still have all the hair on and everything. People are going to pay
a fortune for them, you'll see."

"That's...interesting," Vaszlav said diplomatically. "Perhaps we could
take a look at some?"

Jaromir nodded, his eyes locked with Fraederiq's. "Or perhaps it would
be simpler to agree a price, and have the *sra* repay us from their
first sales? Just in case there is not so much demand as expected?"

"Hells, keep the damned thing." Fraederiq tossed the barrette at
Vaszlav. As quick as a cobra, Jaromir snatched it out of the air.
Wordlessly, he put it back in its place on the stall, then crossed his
arms once again.

Piaerre caught his breath. Around him, conversation stilled. What
Fraederiq had done had been rude, but what Jaromir had done had been a
challenge, and Hett didn't challenge Avauntois, not if they knew what
was good for them.

He glanced at Fraederiq, expecting to see the steely-eyed stare he had
been on the receiving end of so many times himself. Instead, the corner
of Fraederiq's mouth was twisted up. "Nice catch," he said. Without
another word he turned and walked away, whistling.

Piaerre's heart sank. He knew that whistle. It meant that Fraederiq had
a plan, one that involved somebody getting hurt.

* * *

Piaerre spent the rest of the morning doing chores. The bookster had
insisted---Piaerre could study with him five afternoons a week, but he had
to spend his mornings, and all of Purplesday, doing something that
didn't involve memorizing verbs or adding fractions. "*La*, a hungry
body makes a hungry mind," the bookster said cheerfully. "I favor long
walks myself, but the work of the hand is also as good."

So Piaerre stacked firewood and mended the bamboo splint fence that kept
the rabbits out of his family's vegetable garden, the morning's exchange
replaying in his mind. So what if Fraederiq wanted to give a barrette to
Chaentelle? It wasn't like she was ever going to notice Piaerre, no
matter how many times he rescued her from trolls in his daydreams. He
certainly wasn't going to make a fool of himself by trying to compete
with Fraederiq. *He* looked dashing with his hair tied back in imitation
of the bosun's. The one time Piaerre had tried it, he hadn't even made
it to the breakfast table before the smile his mother wasn't able to
conceal had sent him scurrying back upstairs to undo it.

"Ow, cake!" Piaerre swore as he hammered his thumb instead of the bamboo
stake he was supposed to be driving into the ground. Whatever Fraederiq
had in mind, it had something to do with Vaszlav and Jaromir, Piaerre
was sure of it.

As if on cue, the Hett peddler's chimes sounded. It was noon, or just
about; the Hett's bi-weekly visit Starboard Town was over. Piaerre took
his thumb out of his mouth and shook it. He'd be lucky to get more than
a boiled potato for dinner if he didn't finish the fence, but... On
impulse, he hung the hammer on the fence and squeezed into the narrow
gap between his house and the one next to it.

The sweat on Piaerre's face and arms chilled instantly in the cool
shadows. He paused a moment to let his eyes adjust, then inched toward
Slip Street with one hand on the wall beside him. If he stopped just
*here*, he could see the door of Fraederiq's house, while still being
hidden himself.

Minutes passed. A few people walked by on their way home from the
terraced beanfields that lay above and on either side of Starboard Town,
but the door didn't open. Feeling foolish, Piaerre was just about to go
back to his fence when Vaszlav and Jaromir trudged past with their packs
on their backs. A heartbeat later, the door Piaerre had been watching
opened, and Fraederiq stepped onto the street. After glancing both ways,
he set off after the two Hett.

"Great," Piaerre muttered. Now what was he going to do? Tell the bosun
that he didn't like the way Fraederiq had looked at Vaszlav? Wishing he
could whisper in someone's ear from halfway across the world, like a
magician in a story, he set off after Fraederiq.

At the top of Slip Street, the Hett turned right onto Forecastle Road.
Fifty strides behind them, Fraederiq hopped the fence into Papaere
Badette's bedraggled front garden. Piaerre's heart sank. That was the
shortcut to the upper goast pasture---Fraederiq was definitely trying to
catch up with the Hett, out of sight of the rest of the town.

"Afternoon, young bookster. Shouldn't you be up with your books?" The
booming voice made Piaerre jump guiltily.

"Afternoon, bosun." He touched his fingers to his hairline in a hurried
salute. Bosun Uyves returned it with his customary nod. "I'm, um, I'm
mending the fence."

The bosun raised his eyebrows. "Really? Looked to me like you were
standing in the middle of the street."

"Yes, bosun." Piaerre swallowed. "It's just..." *Fraederiq will kill me,*
Piaerre thought bleakly. "It's just, I think there's a problem."

If Piaerre hadn't sounded so miserable, the bosun wouldn't have believed
him. After all, this was the boy who once claimed that he'd been
kidnapped by a pack of banana trolls. But when Piaerre mentioned Jaromir
catching the thrown barrette, the bosun nodded. "Heard about that," he
grunted. "Damn cheeky of him."

"Yes, *sra*," Piaerre said, not sure whether the bosun was referring to
Fraederiq or Jaromir. He finished his story quickly.

Bosun Uyves sucked on his front teeth for a moment. "Up to the goat
pasture, eh? All right. Let's go see what's happening."

"But---"

The bosun raised a finger. Just one, but it was enough. Piaerre closed
his mouth with a snap. How did he get himself into these things?

There was an even shorter shortcut to the pasture, one that involved
scrambling up ten strides of near-vertical rock. Once at the top, the
bosun reached down, grabbed Piaerre's wrist, and pulled him up like a
sack of beans. He tapped his finger to his lips, then slipped into the
trees. With a sigh, Piaerre followed.

The dense carpet of old needles underfoot muffled their steps. Suddenly
Piaerre heard voices ahead---Vaszlav's, pleading, then Fraederiq's.
"Actually, I'm saving you money," he said. "I mean, the fine would be
what, two crowns? Maybe three? Hells, the bosun might even shackle you
for a week. Giving me that piece of trash seems cheap by comparison,
doesn't it?"

Piaerre and the bosun were close enough to hear Vaszlav clear his
throat. "If you put it that way..."

"No," Jaromir said firmly.

Piaerre gingerly moved a branch out of his way so that he could see.
Fraederiq was standing in the middle of the road with his back to the
bushes Piaerre and the bosun were hiding behind. The Hett were facing
him, their oversized packs on their shoulders. A frightened smile was
frozen on Vaszlav's face, but Jaromir's arms were crossed, and his
expression stony.

Fraederiq tsk'd. "Well then, I suppose there's nothing I can do except
go and tell the bosun."

"Tell me what?" Uyves asked, stepping onto the road. As Fraederiq
whirled around, Piaerre saw Jaromir flick his hand to toss something
into the bushes beside him.

"Clear day, bosun," Vaszlav said nervously. "We, um, we were just---"

"Tell me what?" the bosun repeated. There was no mistaking the threat in
his voice this time.

Fraederiq jerked his thumb over his shoulder at Jaromir. "He's wearing a
homestone. I saw it when they were in town."

"Did you now?" Uyves' eyes never left Fraederiq's face. "Funny you
didn't mention it then."

Fraederiq shrugged. "I just wanted to be sure."

The bosun's slap sounded like a stick being broken. Grabbing Fraederiq's
collar with his other hand, Uyves pulled him in close. "Now be sure of
this," he growled. "Taking fines is the captain's business, and no one
else's. I ever catch you doing it under your own sail, *you* will be
chopping wood until your hands bleed. Understood?"

"Understood," Fraederiq said sullenly, touching his finger to his
hairline with a not-quite-challenging carelessness.

The bosun pushed him away. "Good. Now be off with you."

"Yes, *sra*." Fraederiq saluted again. As he turned to walk away, he
shot Piaerre a look that was as cold as a dead snake's heart.

"So," the bosun said to the Hett. "What's this about a homestone?"

Jaromir shrugged without uncrossing his arms. "I am not wearing one,
*sra*." His accent was as sharp as the tang of pine sap in apple cider.

"Mm hm." The bosun beckoned him forward. "Open your shirt."

Wordlessly, the Hett undid his vest, then his shirt, and held them open.
Other than a healthy crop of chest hair, there was nothing to see.

"So where is it?" the bosun asked.

Jaromir lowered his arms and began buttoning his shirt.

"I said, where is it?" the bosun repeated sharply.

Vaszlav wrung his hands. "*Sra*, if my apprentice---"

"Quiet, old man. I'm not talking to you." The bosun cracked a knuckle.
"Hells. All right, you're not wearing one, but I don't think the boy
would have made it up out of nothing. Half a crown, or ten days, take
your pick."

Vaszlav opened his mouth to protest, but Jaromir cut him off. "As you
say, bosun. May I pay in parts?"

"Just as long as I have it before we berth," Uyves replied.

The Hett dipped his head. "As you say."

Uyves waited a heartbeak for the '*sra*' that should have followed. When
it didn't, he glanced at Vaszlav. "Pretty sure of himself, isn't he?"

The older Hett smiled nervously in apology. "He is still new to the
mountain, *sra*. He means no offense."

"Mm. Well." Uyves clapped Piaerre on the shoulder. "Anyway, good work
letting me know, lad."

"You're welcome," Piaerre mumbled. He could already feel Fraederiq's
hands around his throat...

With a final nod to the Hett, Uyves turned and began walking back along
the road to Starboard Town. As soon as he was out of earshot, Vaszlav
rounded on Jaromir angrily. What kind of idiot was he? The barrette was
nothing compared to the townspeople's goodwill, never mind the bosun's.
Had he forgotten who was the apprentice, and who was the master?

Jaromir just nodded, saying, "Yes *sra*, no *sra*," at regular
intervals. As soon as Vaszlav paused for breath, he said, "Excuse me,
*sra*," and bent over to fish his homestone out of the bushes where he'd
thrown it.

"Wonderful," Vaszlav said tiredly. "Perhaps you could have waited until
the young *sra* was not here?"

Jaromir glanced at Piaerre as he hung the homestone around his neck. It
was a flat lozenge of polished granite, half again as tall as it was
wide, with a hole drilled near the top for a cord. Many of the Hett who
had come to the mountain the past few years wore them. For luck, for
good health, because it had been their grandmother's, because all the
other Hett were doing it---there were as many explanations as there were
stones, and as many complaints about the practice as there were
Avauntois who would rather not have any Hett on the mountain at all.

As a sop to the more outspoken among them, the captain had ordered a
handful of homestones tested for magic. When none was found, he banned
them anyway, ordering a fine for a first offense, and expulsion from the
mountain for a second. *And here I am looking at one*, Piaerre thought.
He should have stuck to mending the fence.

"Don't worry," he said aloud to Vaszlav. "I won't say anything."

"Thank you, young *sra*," the Hett replied, ducking his head. "Now, if
you will excuse us? We will be two days to Forecastle with these packs."

"Sure. See you in two weeks." He raised a hand in farewell and turned
back toward Starboard Town.

* * *

Piaerre was quiet at dinner that evening, but neither his parents nor
his sister QueÃ§enne noticed. Since the bookster had taken him on as an
apprentice, he had often been lost in his own thoughts. When he did
speak, he sounded, according to his father, "Like someone who's had his
brains stirred with a spoon."

That evening, though, his mind wasn't on verbs, or the legal rights of
Gifted animals, or any of the other insubstantial wonders that filled
his lessons. Instead, two thoughts chased each other around in his head:
whether he should tell the bosun that Jaromir actually was wearing a
homestone, and what the odds were that he'd live to see his next naming
day. Fraederiq had looked *very* angry...

Lost in thought, he barely noticed when his father set his knife and
drill aside and put the bamboo flute he'd been working on to his lips.
The gentle sound filled the house like a warm scent, or a promise that
the spring delayed by the mountain's journey north would soon be summer.
Suddenly yawning, Piaerre helped his mother Elaiene clear the table,
then trudged upstairs to bed.

Taking his little piece of dayglass from its place by the window, where
it had been soaking up the day's light, he pulled a slim cloth-bound
book from the shelf by his bed. *Acts and Questions of the Parledoux of
Avaunt* was stamped on the front, with *487* underneath in antique
Seyfertois numerals. Bosun Uyves had lent it to him the day after
receiving it from the captain in Forecastle. "Borrow the rest of them as
well, if you want," he had said, entirely unbothered by his own lack of
interest in the printed word. He knew Avaunt's laws well enough for
Starboard Town's needs, and if someone wanted to argue the details,
well, Forecastle was only a day away.

Piaerre settled himself on his bed and opened the book to the spot he
had marked the week before with a reddish-brown feather he had found in
the garden. Question 27: what should be done about the new tax the
Uwsians were charging on steel? (Pass it on to buyers.) Question 28:
what about the rabbits that plagued the mountain's beanfields? (More
traps.)

And then, Question 29: *Shall This Assembly Resolve That the Number of
Indwellers Permitted on the Mountain Outwith Berthing-Times Shall Not
Exceed Eight Hundreds?* He read it through carefully. It never mentioned
the Hett by name, but its authors left no doubt that the "indwellers"
they had in mind weren't people like Piaerre's grandfather. "Persons
most usually employed in menial trades, such as street sweepers,
nightsoil carters, peddlers, and scissor sharpeners." That was the
Hett---at least, the mountain-born Hett. They knew their place; they kept
their eyes down when the Avauntois spoke to them, and laughed when
someone made a joke at their expense. If it rankled, well, what of it?
It was no worse than the way the rest of Cherne treated their wandering
cousins.

But over the last few years, a growing number of those wanderers had
fetched up on Avaunt. Ten years ago, only a few hundred Hett had called
the flying mountain home. Now, there were a thousand. "Or more," a few
people muttered darkly. "Can't just be chance, and there can't be any
good in it."

Those mutterings had turned to arguments in Forecastle's taverns.
Finally, the captain had ordered the loudest hotheads to put the
question to the Parledoux. His chief clerk had been politely negative
after the reading, but its authors were not deterred. Fortified with a
few glasses of Enswer cider, they vowed to rewrite it, and bring it
forward again.

Until that afternoon, the debate had largely passed Piaerre by. As far
as he was concerned, the Hett consisted of the half-dozen families that
came to Starboard Town each fall to help with the charcoaling, and
tinkers like Vaszlav. The tinker's little stall, with its pins, springs,
and screws, had seemed half-magical when Piaerre was little. Later, when
he had mastered his letters well enough to read on his own, the books
that Vaszlav brought from Forecastle to rent out to Starboard Town's
inhabitants became Piaerre's salvation and refuge. They were less
important now, but he still felt that he owed the old man something. He
could only guess how many hours Vaszlav had spent badgering Forecastle's
booksellers to get them to entrust this book or that to a Hett...

Piaerre tossed and turned that night, playing out a thousand different
battles with Fraederiq in his mind. When his mother called him
downstairs for breakfast, he dragged himself out of bed, pulled on his
clothes, picked up his satchel, and mispronounced both of the Praczny
curses he knew when its twice-mended leather strap broke for the third
time.

"Well, you'll just have to ask your papaere to fix it again," Elaiene
said, stirring the beans bubbling away on the stove. "Oh, and see if he
wants to come for dinner tonight."

The early morning sun made the cobblestones gleam. Piaerre said hello to
people on his way down the street, and waved to Jaecque, who had thrown
open his bakery's shutters, but was too engrossed in the morning's
baking to wave back. One of his cats mewled at Piaerre, darting away
when he bent over to pet it. Another paused, its paw upraised, to watch
Piaerre pass by, then returned to its grooming.

Slip Street ran aground in a tangle of weeds and saplings sixty strides
further on. From there, a narrow path snaked through the corkscrew pine
forest between to the stairs that led to Piaerre's grandfather's house.
Steep shadows lay between the trees; here and there, tiny spiderwebs
glistened with dew, while overhead, a sickle-wing bat chittered
nervously.

The path ended at the edge of a near-cliff that fell away like a stone
waterfall. A man-tall bamboo crane waited there patiently, its rope
lying oiled and coiled in a plank box. As always, Piaerre took a firm
grip on one of the crane's legs and leaned out to look down, his pulse
thumping in his ears.

Lurid green creepers still covered the mountain's broad flanks below
him, though the riotous pink flowers that had bloomed on them after the
mountain's brief stay in Mau Ngapcha had fallen to pieces months ago.
The heavy plank steps half-hidden among them doubled back twice before
reaching Papaere Vurt's little cottage. Vurt had drilled holes for the
steps' spikes himself, just as he had built the little crane with his
own two hands, and fitted and nailed every board in the cottage's
verandah. It had taken him over a year, but the view made it all
worthwhile.

And what a view it was. The mountain itself ended only a hundred strides
beneath the cottage's floor. Beneath that lay empty air, a few birds,
and then, half a gallop below, the plains of eastern Darp. It was a long
way to fall...

Piaerre pulled himself back from the edge and made his way carefully
down the stairs, his satchel against his chest. He paused a moment on
the broad verandah that was his grandfather's pride and joy, then
thumped the weathered little drum hanging next to the cottage's
blue-and-orange door.

"Coming," Vurt shouted. The round mahogany peg on the end of his right
leg clunked on the floor inside. A moment later he pulled the door open.

"Morning," he said. "Wasn't expecting to see you today."

"My strap broke again." Piaerre held up his satchel.

"Damn thing. Really ought to get you a new one." His grandfather stepped
aside and waved him in.

The cottage only had two rooms. A narrow bed and a polished teak dresser
whose drawers hadn't been closed in years stood next to one wall in the
first. A silhouette portrait of Vurt's late wife hung over the bed; a
misshapen skull hung alone on the wall opposite it.

The second, larger, room served as kitchen, workshop, and (less
frequently than Piaerre's mother would have liked) bath. Dusty jars of
preserves looked down from their shelves at half-finished rabbit traps
with coiled bamboo springs and thorn teeth. An arm's length of rusty
chain, each link as big as Piaerre's hand, lay next to a cracked
hourglass whose sands had long since run out.

"Have you eaten?" Vurt asked.

"Yes, thanks," Piaerre said, his eyes watering slightly from the spices
sizzling in the battered black skillet on top of the stove.

"Good. Wouldn't be enough for the both of us."

As his grandfather gulled down his usual mix of scrambled eggs, bean
curds, dried chilis, and unripe tomatoes, Piaerre explain what had
happened the day before. Vurt frowned when he heard about the fine.
"I'd've taken the full two crowns," he said. "'Course, I'd've taken two
off your friend Fraederiq, too. Boy needs his hide striped."

"He's not my friend," Piaerre protested.

"Used to be. Niquolas, too. It's a shame they've both gone sour."

"They're not all bad," Piaerre said, with the instinctive solidarity of
youth against age. "Fraederiq does chores for Mamaere Mayeule
sometimes---and Niquolas minds Matthieu every Greensday afternoon."

"Mm hm, and gets paid for it. Now here, pass that over." Pushing aside
his skillet, he reached for his grandson's satchel.

Piaerre held it back. "Why would you have fined Jaromir at all? Those
stones aren't hurting anybody."

Vurt cleared his throat noisily. "It isn't about the stones, lad. It's
about the law. Start letting folks like this what's his name---"

"Jaromir."

"---Jaromir, start letting him think he can pick and choose which laws
he's going to obey, that'll just make 'em think there's hope for
changing things that aren't ever going to change. That Klaues fellow the
captain's so fond of has the right idea---don't try to change the rules,
just find a way to slide around them. Now, do you want me to look at
your bag or not?"

Piaerre took his books out of his satchel and passed it to his
grandfather. Vurt eyed the books sourly. "You know, it'd last longer if
you didn't load it up so much." He squinted at the stitching and clucked
his tongue. "Mm hm. It's not so bad. I can do it for you right now if
you want."

"Thanks, papapere."

"*Awshe*." He picked up his awl. "So, what happens next?"

Piaerre shrugged helplessly. "Fraederiq beats me to death with a stick?"

"Heh. Should have kept up your fencing lessons," his grandfather said
absently.

"It wasn't my idea to stop," Piaerre said defensively. When his
mother---Vurt's only daughter---had discovered that her father was teaching
Piaerre the basics of swordplay, she had put her foot down hard. Her son
was *not* going to be a rogue like his grandfather. He could learn bow
or spear for militia, like a good Avauntois, but there'd be no fencing,
and *definitely* no brawling.

Piaerre watched his grandfather work in silence, his mind on Jaromir's
homestone. Fraederiq's father Gaeston claimed that the Hett wore them as
a reminder of the fact that the mountain had once been theirs. "That's
why they ought to be banned," Gaeston had told Piaerre's father one
afternoon, not long after Question 29 had been put to the Parledoux. "If
even one of 'em thinks it's ever going to be theirs again, that's one
too many."

Piaerre couldn't remember what his father had said---something to calm
Gaeston down, most likely, or a joke to change the subject. But that
night, Piaerre's dozing dreams of Chaentelle doing laundry had been
interrupted by snatches of conversation from below. "I hear more of that
every time I go to Forecastle," Laeuc had said to Elaiene. "If the
captain doesn't do something about it, there'll be trouble when we
berth."

"Here. What do you think?" Vurt held up the satchel, breaking Piaerre's
gloomy reverie.

"It looks good. Thanks, papaere." Piaerre bit another sliver off his
much-abused thumbnail and wiped his hand on his pants. He took the
satchel and tugged on the strap. The new piece of leather felt stiff,
but would wear in quickly. "What do I owe you?"

"Gaaah." Papaere Vurt wrinkled his nose. "Clean the stove and we'll call
it a draw."

"All right." Piaerre stuck out his hand, grinning. His grandfather
pressed his palm against it with a businesslike nod. They both knew
Piaerre would have cleaned the stove anyway.

Vurt glanced at the rectangle of sunshine creeping across his battered
pine workbench. "You'd best be going."

"Yeah. Thanks again." Piaerre slipped his books back into the bag. There
were only six of them, but that was six more than most people in
Starboard Town read in a year.

He turned to go, then stopped himself. "Oh, I almost forgot---maere wants
to know, are you coming up for dinner tonight?"

Vurt shrugged. "Wasn't planning to. Plenty here I should use before it
goes off." Which was a lie, and they both knew it. "'Sides, I feel like
a gull, nipping off your plates."

Piaerre rolled his eyes. "You're not being a gull. And if you don't
come, maere'll spend the whole meal worrying about you, and then she'll
be down here tomorrow with a new pair of mittens and a basket full of
biscuits."

"Oh, *saad*, she hasn't gone and knit some more, has she?"

"Of course not. She baked them." He pretended to duck as his grandfather
growled and raised a fist. "But if you don't come, she'll probably make
you longjohns as well." He tried to leer. "You could always stop off at
Mamaere Mayeule's on the way back."

"Oh, could I now? Awful kind of you to give me permission."

Piaerre grinned and slung his satchel over his shoulder. "Anyway, I have
to go."

"All right." Vurt took his cane from the tool rack beside his workbench
and followed his grandson out onto the verandah. There, grandfather and
grandson paused a moment to admire the view.

Avaunt was still over the chaparral of eastern Darp, as it had been, and
would be, for weeks. Gray-green shrubs lay on the dry, red earth like
tufts of stained wool. Thin streams glistened between them at the bottom
of rocky, steep-sided gullies. A gallop away, a pair of giant stone
hands, weather but unbroken and six stories tall, reached toward the sky
as they had done since the time of the Uncertain Angels. No one knew
whether they were pleading, or waiting to catch a star that had yet to
fall; no one knew whether they were part of a buried giant, a side
effect of some spell wrought during the great war in which the Angels
had destroyed themselves, or merely some eccentric work of art. And
other than Piaerre, no one in Starboard Town much cared. The Angels had
fallen, the world carried on---if it wasn't disturbing the goats or the
beans, best to leave it be.

"See over there?" Piaerre said suddenly, pointing. "Horses."

"Good eyes," Vurt said, fishing his glasses out from under his shirt and
holding them up in front of his face. If there had been anyone else
there, he would have grunted and changed the topic, rather than
admitting that he could no longer see clearly at that distance. "You
think they're wild?"

Piaerre studied them for a moment. "Maybe," he said hesitantly. "I don't
know."

Vurt shook his head and pointed. "You're not looking. See back that way?
Next to the hands?" He waited until his grandson nodded. Two dismounted
riders lay in the shade with their heads on their saddles. "Probably
taking them to market. Coriandel, maybe, or Armaq." He tucked his
glasses back under his rough linen shirt. "You should get up to your
lessons."

"I suppose." Piaerre looked longingly at the world rolling by beneath
them. Four months ago, the land beneath the flying mountain had been
carpeted with dense green jungle. They had seen flocks of white-winged
birds take flight at dawn, and a herd of hippos stampede for safety when
a crocodile attacked. There had been villages, too, with tendrils of
smoke rising from the thatched roofs of their longhouses.

The jungle had given way to grassland as the mountain flew north, which
in turn had given way to the windblown grit of the Karaband Desert.
Piaerre and his grandfather had slung hammocks on the verandah then, and
slept under the stars. Piaerre's parents and sister joined them a few
times for dinner, and a few other townspeople came down as well to see
what there was to be seen, or keep Vurt up to date with the mountain's
gossip, or just to sit in silence and listen to the steady breeze of the
mountain's stately flight.

Most often, though, Piaerre and Vurt had the verandah to themselves. The
old man listened to his grandson describe what he had learned in his
lessons that day, telling him stories about life on the ground below in
return. They shared breaded dates that Piaerre bought from Mamaere
Mayeule on Redsday and Greensday mornings, and if one or the other
closed his eyes and breathed a little easier now and again, well, what
of it? No one fussed over Vurt, or asked him if he wanted yet another
cup of tea. No one bullied Piaerre, or made fun of all the words he
knew. They were both content, though only Vurt knew enough to know how
rare such contentment was.

A week ago, the flying mountain's shadow had crossed the River Wise,
which marked the halfway point of the mountain's journey from Mau
Ngapcha to Normous Berth. When they reached their northern destination,
the mountain's people would have two weeks to earn their livings. Silk,
mahogany, chocolate, nutmeg, mace, and cloves would come out of storage,
and be replaced by steel, wool, cider, and leather. And while Piaerre's
parents still claimed that they hadn't made up their minds, Vurt and
Piaerre both knew that Piaerre would leave the mountain then. The
hundreds of old books in the Captain's House, and the eclectic lessons
of a single eccentric bookster, were not enough. Piaerre was sixteen; if
he wanted to become a bookster himself, he had to leave the mountain and
find schooling elsewhere.

Vurt put his hand on his grandson's shoulder and shook him gently. "Well
then, off with you. Tell your mother I'll be there for dinner, if you
like."

"I will."

As Piaerre turned to go, his grandfather said, "Piaerre? You did the
right thing talking to the bosun."

Piaerre forced a smile. "Bet you Fraederiq doesn't think so."

His grandfather frowned. "Don't suppose he does. You watch out for him,
all right? He's trouble."

"I'll be careful," Piaerre promised. He forced a smile as Vurt squeezed
his shoulder, then started up the stairs.

* * *

Piaerre was breathing hard by the time he reached the path back to town.
His papaere had the best view on this side of the mountain, but you had
to work to enjoy it.

He fingered the patch on his satchel strap as he scanned the trees.
There was no sign of Fraederiq, but that didn't mean anything. Boys in
Starboard Town started hunting the rabbits that infested the mountain as
soon as they were old enough to hold a sling, and the trick to getting
close enough to use one was knowing how to hide...

Piaerre wiped his hands on his heavy cotton trousers and set off briskly
through the braided pines. "*Gangre*," he muttered, trying to distract
himself. "To walk. *ForlÃ¸pre*. To run..." His teacher, Razi, had started
teaching him Praczny a week before. It was harder than Seyfertois, which
was practically the same as what was spoken on the mountain, or Enswer,
which was the most common language in Normous Berth, but the bookster
said the effort would be good exercise for his mind. "*Klatre*, to
climb. *KjÃ¸pre*, to buy. *Selgre*, to sell..."

Piaerre hurried along the path, suddenly aware that he was going to be
late for his lesson. He jumped as a macaw squawked at him from a branch
overhead, instantly angry at the way it made his heart pound. Stooping,
he picked up a stone and threw it at the brightly colored bird. "Go
home," he said loudly. The macaw squawked again and flapped away,
wondering in its little bird mind why the trees smelled so wrong, and
why the nights were so cold. A few jungle creatures were always marooned
when the mountain left Mau Ngapcha. Sometimes the townspeople caught
them and sold them as pets or delicacies at Normous Berth. More often,
though, they starved, or froze to death in the next northern winter.

Piaerre heaved a sigh of relief when he reached Slip Street without
being ambushed. It was almost noon; most people were stringing beans and
weeding potatoes in the terraced fields on either side of town. He waved
hello to the few who weren't, but didn't stop to chat.

The Captain's House watched over Starboard Town from the top of Slip
Street like a stern old shepherd watching her flock. The old captain had
still been living there when Piaerre was born. After his death, it had
been empty between the new captain's annual visits, until Razi had
arrived to catalog the eclectic collection of old books and yellowing
papers that filled its lower floor.

That morning, the walled garden in front of the house was a riot of
purple and orange flowers. Bees buzzed back and forth among them in busy
ecstasy. Piaerre paused at its front gate---the only iron gate in
Starboard Town---to catch his breath. As he reached for the latch, a meaty
fist struck the side of his head.

He yelped, staggering under the blow. Strong hands grabbed his jacket
and pulled him into the shadowed alley next to the garden wall.

Piaerre oophed as Fraederiq slammed him against the stone wall. "You
little slug," he hissed, his face so close that Piaerre could feel the
warmth of his breath. "Who the hells do you think you are? Eh? You think
you're better than the rest of us because of all that cake you read?"

"Let go of me!" Piaerre struggled helplessly. Fraederiq jerked Piaerre
toward him and slammed him back into the wall.

"Didn't anyone ever tell you to mind your own business?" Fraederiq
twisted Piaerre's collar tight with his left hand and punched him in the
ribs with his right. "Eh? Didn't anyone... ever... tell you... not... to stick...
your nose... where it doesn... belong?" Fresh blows punctuated the sentence.

"Let me go! Let me go or I'll tell!" Piaerre threw a desperate punch of
his own. He was as surprised as Fraederiq when it grazed the older boy's
cheek.

Fraederiq caught Piaerre's wrist and drove Piaerre's hand into his own
face. "Ow! Oh, stop, Piaerre! Stop, please, you'll hurt yourself!" Again
and again Fraederiq punched Piaerre in the face with his own fist. Hot
tears stung Piaerre's eyes. He opened his mouth to yell for help.

And at that moment, without warning, the mountain lurched beneath them.

"Whoa!" Off-balance, Fraederiq stumbled backward. The two boys fell in a
heap. As they went down, the top of Piaerre's head hit Fraederiq's jaw
with a loud crack.

Piaerre scrambled to his feet and ran, leaving his satchel where it had
fallen. Behind him, Fraederiq stood up unsteadily and spat red. "You
little cake!" he bellowed. He hadn't really been angry before. He'd just
wanted to remind Piaerre who was lead bull. But now there was blood in
Fraederiq's mouth, and his lip was going to swell. He balled his hands
into fists and gave chase.

The two boys pelted down Slip Street twenty strides apart. Neither
noticed the frightened looks on the faces of people in the street. "What
just happened?" they asked one another. Had there been an avalanche? But
then why hadn't there been any noise?

No one had noticed yet that the sun lay fifteen degrees away from where
it had been. No one had yet realized that for the first time in history,
the flying mountain had changed course mid-flight.

Past Donaien and Armaend's; past Fraederiq's house, where his father
Gaeston was just coming out onto the street, looking for someone to
blame for the bottles that had fallen off his shelves and shattered.
There---Mamaere Mayeule's tavern. Piaerre cut right into the little alley
that ran between it and the smokehouse next door. He ran blindly for a
second, his eyes useless in the deep shadows, hoping Mayeule hadn't left
any barrels out to air.

Fraederiq was only a dozen strides behind him when Piaerre burst onto
the little courtyard behind the tavern. He jumped over a chair, banged
his knee against a second without stopping, and pulled himself over the
stone wall at the rear of the courtyard. The mountain wasn't quite as
steep there as it was around most of Starboard Town. It was one of those
places children were definitely not supposed to play, which meant that
Piaerre knew it as well as his tongue knew his teeth. There was a narrow
ledge thirty strides below that led to his papaere's cottage. He'd be
safe there.

Fraederiq hardly broke stride as he flung himself over the wall. Piaerre
glanced over his shoulder as he slipped and slid down the mountain,
scraping his hands as he grabbed at bushes to slow himself down. Stones
clattered past him as Fraederiq did the same. It was going to be close...

"Whoa!" he cried, almost sliding past the ledge before his boots found
purchase. He grabbed hold of a salal bush for balance, then quickstepped
along the narrow shelf.

Fraederiq slid to a halt two heartbeats behind him. A trickle of bloody
spit made a dark wet track through the dust on his face. "I'm going to
throw you over the side, you little cake!" he shouted.

The ledge was barely a handspan wide. Both boys had to shuffle, left
foot to right, then right forward, hands grabbing bushes, branches,
roots, and outcroppings of rock for balance.

Piaerre stumbled on a loose chip of stone. "Go on, jump!" Fraederiq
yelled. "Save me the trouble!"

"Jump yourself!" Piaerre said without turning. There was nothing between
him and the plains below but a gallop of empty air. Left foot, right,
left, right... He could see his papaere's cottage. Just a few more steps,
and---

Fraederiq's hand caught hold of his collar. "Gotcha!" the older boy said
triumphantly.

"Let go! Fraederiq, let go! I'm going to fall!" Piaerre wriggled and
twisted, his shirt riding up as Fraederiq pulled him back.

Fraederiq's ugly grin widened. He let go of the roots he was holding and
pulled his hand back for a blow.

As he did so, the mountain shuddered again. Fraederiq's eyes widened in
sudden terror as he lost his balance. He let go of Piaerre and
windmilled his arms.

"Help!" Fraederiq shouted. He reached out desperately, but Piaerre was
frozen against the mountainside. Off balance, his arms still flailing,
Fraederiq toppled backward into space and plummeted toward the dry earth
so far below.

* * *

Piaerre clung to the mountain. "No, no, no..." he moaned, squeezing his
eyes shut so hard that speckles swirled beneath the lids. His arms tried
to drive his fingers into the rock, to root him in the mountain so that
he wouldn't fall too. What was happening to the mountain? How could
Fraederiq just *fall* like that? And---and why hadn't Piaerre reached out
and grabbed him?

He bit his lip, his body shuddering as he tried to control his sobs. He
had to get out of there before the mountain shook again. He took a deep,
unsteady breath and forced his hands to relax. They were sticky with
blood. He had scraped his palms and fingers raw on the mountain. His
forehead too---he must have ground his face against the cliffside.

He turned his head to see how far it was to the end of the ledge. Twenty
strides, maybe less. He could do that. He *had* to do that.

He stood there, the wind of the mountain's passage ruffling his hair,
until he stopped shaking. With his face and chest pressed against the
cold, rough rock, he edged toward his papaere's, one step at a time.
Each time he moved his feet, he had to peel his hands off the mountain
and pounce on the next outcropping of rock. The air around him was
filled with the trills and caws of panicked birds. He felt oddly
disconnected, as if his body was moving itself, and he was just
watching.

The ledge finally blurred into a steep hillside, with sturdy deep-rooted
shrubs for him to hold onto. Without warning, the last of his breakfast
rose in his throat.

A minute later, he cleared his throat and spat in a vain attempt to
clear the taste from his mouth, then wiped dust, sweat, blood, and tears
from his face with the tail of his shirt. He couldn't believe everything
that had just happened. What---saints, what was he going to tell
Fraederiq's father?

Piaerre stumbled shakily toward his papaere's cottage. Pine branches
slapped his face in silent reproach. He'd been right there. All he had
to do was put out his hand. Why hadn't he just put out his hand?

Vurt was on his verandah, cursing in a flat monotone when his grandson
stumbled out of the trees. "Piaerre!" he exclaimed, dropping the old
crossbow he'd been trying to reassemble.

Piaerre collapsed into his papaere's arms. "Piaerre? Piaerre!" Vurt
shook him. "Frogs on stilts, boy, you look like you've been a ghost! Are
you all right?"

Piaerre shook his head. "I--- we--- Papaere, he fell. F-F-Fraederiq fell.
When the m-m-mountain..." He buried his face in his papaere's chest, his
body racked by sobs again.

"What?" Vurt took Piaerre's shoulders and pushed him back a step. "Who
fell?"

"F-F-Fraederiq. We were back there, and he fell, right off the side."

"*Saad*," Vurt cursed. "Are you sure? Maybe he only slipped down a
ways."

Paierre shook his head miserably. "No, I s-s-saw him. He *fell*." He
wiped his nose on his sleeve. "Papaere, what happened to the mountain?"

"I don't know," Vurt said grimly. "But it knocked me right over. And
look." He pointed at the sky. The sun was almost hidden behind the roof
of his cottage. "We've changed course. I'm guessing it's about a
quarter-quarter-arc. If your paere didn't still have my
weeping-be-damned compass, I'd know better." His face darkened. "Now,
tell me what happened."

A pair of plausible lies flashed through Piaerre's mind. "We were back
behind Mamaere Mayeule's," he confessed miserably. "He was chasing me,
and I thought if I could get here I'd be all right, but he w-would have
caught me if I'd come straight down Slip Street, so I---" He broke off,
unable to meet his papaere's eyes.

Vurt waited, his face expressionless. "I went over her back wall,"
Piaerre finished dully. "He came after me. We were halfway here when it
happened."

Vurt studied his grandson's face. "That was a stupid place to be."

"I know," Piaerre said wretchedly. "I'm sorry." Suddenly his eyes
widened. "What about maere and paere? And QueÃ§enne?" He turned to run up
the stairs.

Vurt caught his arm. "Hang on a heartbeat. You can't go up there looking
like that---you'll give your mother a fright. Go inside and clean up a
bit. There's water in the jug." He pushed his grandson toward the
cottage's front door, then stooped over to pick up his crossbow, wincing
as his knee cracked.

A moment later, the old brass wash jug clanged back down on his kitchen
table. The door opened. "You ready?" Vurt asked over his shoulder.

"Papaere---what are you doing?"

Vurt turned to face his grandson. "What does it look like I'm doing?"

Piaerre looked at the sword slung at his grandfather's side, the loaded
crossbow in his hands, and the polished teak fangs of the ankle-biter
sticking out of the worn leather pack on his back. "Starting a war?"

Vurt scowled. "Get on with you. I'd rather have it and not need it than
need it and not have it, that's all. Now come on." He jerked his head
toward the stairs.

Piaerre hesitated. "What's wrong?" Vurt asked.

"Papaere---what am I going to tell Gaeston?"

His grandfather's mouth twisted. "I don't know, lad. Never have. Now
come on---your maere will be fretting herself sick."

* * *

By the time they reached Mamaere Mayeule's tavern, half of Starboard
Town was standing on the street in front of it, anxiously asking the
other half why the mountain had changed course, and what it meant. "I
don't know!" Bosun Uyves repeated loudly. His voice was as big as his
shoulders were broad, but even standing on one of Mamaere Mayeule's
sturdy plank tables, he could barely make himself heard above the
hubbub. "I don't know anything more than you do. No, the captain didn't
tell me this was going to--- Yes, I'm sure he knows. No, I mean, I'm sure
he knows it's happened, not I'm sure he knew it was going to--- Salt and
scissors, Vurt, what in Luck's name is all that for?"

The townspeople turned to gape at the old man. Vurt glanced down at the
crossbow in his hands. "What, this?" he asked defensively. "I just
thought--- You know, better safe than sorry."

"Safe from what?" The speaker's voice was sharp, almost surly:
Gaeston's.

Vurt scowled. "If I knew, I wouldn't be standing here, would I?"

Gaeston folded his arms. "Well, you must have *some* idea."

"Let's just keep our ideas to ourselves," the bosun said loudly, glaring
at Gaeston as the crowd started murmuring. "And thank your favorite
saints that we got off with nothing worse than sprained ankles and
broken crockery."

Piaerre felt as though he was going to throw up again. He took a deep
breath and opened his mouth.

"Piaerre!" Someone spun him around. "Are you all right?"

Before Piaerre could answer, his mother hugged him. "Sh, sh, sh,"
Elaiene whispered in his ear, rocking him from side to side. "Oh,
Piaerre, I was so worried."

Piaerre disentangled himself. "I'm fine, maere," he said, embarrassment
proving stronger than relief. "I'm fine. Where's QueÃ§enne?"

"Helping Chaentelle with Matthieu," Laeuc said from beside his wife,
held back from hugging Piaerre only by the memory of having once been a
teenage boy himself. He took a square of coarse cotton from his pocket
and handed it to his son. As Piaerre wiped his face, Laeuc said, "They
were hoeing beans when it happened. Matthieu's still frightened, so
they're trying to calm him down. Like the bosun said, it's lucky no one
was really hurt."

"Someone was," Vurt said. He caught the bosun's eye and raised his voice
so it would carry. "Someone *was* hurt."

"What? Who?"

Vurt stepped forward and put his hand on Gaeston's shoulder. "I'm sorry.
Saints and all their stories, man, I'm sorry. Fraederiq and Piaerre were
down by my place when it happened. Fraederiq fell over the side."

"Oh, no," someone whispered. Someone else started to cry. The shock on
the bosun's face mirrored that on Gaeston's.

"Fraedi?" Gaeston said helplessly.

Vurt nodded, never taking his eyes away from Gaeston's. "I'm sorry," he
repeated. Without warning, Gaeston knocked Vurt's arm away.

"Hold on, there," the bosun said sternly, grabbing Gaeston's sleeve.
"Just hold on. It isn't his fault."

"What the hells was my boy doing down by *your* place?" Gaeston
demanded.

"Never mind that now," the bosun ordered, shaking him. "Maybe he got
caught in some trees. Go get your climbing gear. You too, Donaien." With
a speed born of many late-night searches for missing goats, the bosun
quickly organized a search party.

Piaerre stood silently beside his mother, forgotten in the rush. He
still felt sick. Why hadn't he grabbed Fraederiq's hand? And what was
going to happen to him when the bosun had a moment to stop and think?
The whole town knew how well Fraederiq and Piaerre got along. Would they
think Piaerre had pushed Fraederiq? If anyone had seen the mad chase
down Slip Street from the Captain's House...

The Captain's House. "Where's Razi?" Piaerre asked. "Where's the
bookster?" How could he have forgotten his teacher? The shelves in the
Captain's House were mahogany, as tough and as heavy as iron. If one of
them had fallen on the bookster's head...

"*La*, Razi is fine." The lilting voice behind Piaerre made him jump.
"Perhaps a little dizzy, but fine."

The bookster was as tall as the bosun, but narrow where the bosun was
wide. His skin was desert-black instead of mountain-brown, all except
his palms, which were a startling pink. In place of the Avauntois'
boots, trousers, shirts, and colorfully-embroidered vests, he wore a tan
ankle-length robe that he called a *deel*, held close around his waist
with a woven leather belt, and sandals whose soles were as thick as the
last joint on Piaerre's thumb. He had arrived in Starboard Town just
after it left Mau Ngapcha four months ago, with a note from the captain
giving him permission to inspect and catalog the library's contents.
Piaerre had become his apprentice three days later.

As always, the expression on Razi's face was somehow cheerful and
melancholy at the same time. He dipped his head toward the bosun. "I am
sorry to hear of the young man's passing. I regret I did not know him
well."

"Don't go building his pyre just yet," Uyves said sharply. "He could
have got lucky."

"Just so," Razi said, dipping his head again. He turned to Piaerre and
held up a familiar leather satchel. "Now, I believe this is yours?"

The search lasted an hour. It would have been half that, but no one
wanted to be the first to give up. There was nowhere for Fraederiq to
be---no lonely trees, no outcroppings, nothing. "I'm sorry," the bosun
said quietly to Gaeston, squeezing his shoulder as Vurt had done.
Dry-eyed, Fraederiq's father unbuckled his climbing harness, slung his
ropes over his shoulder, and walked slowly up Slip Street to his empty
home. He didn't look at Piaerre as he passed.

As the searchers returned to town, a crowd gathered in Mamaere Mayeule's
tern, which served when necessary as Starboard Town's inn, its general
store when the weather was too bad for tinkers and pack-traders to set
up their stalls on Slip Street, and its meeting hall. Built for weddings
and birthdays, its main room couldn't hold half of the two hundred or
more people trying to crowd into it to look at the map Razi had brought
down from the Captain's House.

"Stop shoving!" the bosun thundered. "Stop... weeping... shoving! Mayeule,
open the shutters so people can hear. Kings and their collars, this is
ridiculous! I said, *stop shoving!*"

Miraculously, people did. Piaerre found himself pinned against the edge
of a table with half a dozen people peering over his shoulders, and half
a dozen more peering over theirs.

Standing beside him, Razi seemed oblivious to the press of people. He
opened his leather case and unfolded the stiff sheet of parchment it
held to make a square an arm's length across. The map's colors had faded
with age, and the gall ink used for the lettering had gone brown, but
the straight blue line that showed the mountain's path across the face
of Cherne was as clear as the day it was drawn.

The bosun set a dayglass lantern next to the map, then put a pebble down
on the blue line. "So, let's say we're here. From what I can tell, we're
heading north of northeast instead of pure north. If we stay on this
course---"

"What if we turn again?" someone called out.

"I said 'if', didn't I?" the bosun growled. He tapped the inverted
triangles marking the mountains that defined the border between the
great plains of Darp and the patchwork quilt of princedoms, dukedoms,
and my-back-yarddoms that was Praczedt. "*If* we stay on the course,
we'll hit the Brumosos in a couple of weeks at most."

"Did he say we were going to hit the mountains?" "Saints, we're going to
crash into a mountain!" "We'll be crushed like bugs!"

"We are *not* going to *hit* anything!" the bosun bellowed. "And the
next person who says we are will spend the rest of this trip pulling
weeds!"

In the hush that followed, Piaerre said, "Do you think---" He stopped
himself.

The bosun raised his eyebrows warningly. "Do I think what?"

"Nothing, *sra*."

"Come on, lad, spit it out."

Piaerre swallowed. "Do you think something might have happened to
Normous Berth?" he asked. "I mean, maybe the mountain's turning around
because there's nowhere for it to berth any more."

"Saints and their songs," someone gasped. "My Eilise is prenticing
there."

Piaerre winced under the bosun's glare. "Or maybe---"

Razi elbowed his ribs. "*La*, or perhaps the mountain is thirsty," he
said loudly. "Like a camel. Once they decide they want a drink, straight
away they go to the nearest water. There is no stopping them, I assure
you, none."

The bosun grunted. "Not likely. We filled the cisterns at Mau Ngapcha,
same as we always do. Never heard of the mountain getting thirsty
before."

Razi shrugged. "As we have discovered today, everything has its first
time." He reached for the map, but the bosun pressed his hand on it.

"Leave it here," he said. "Anything else *does* happen, we'll want to
have another look. Mayeule? You watch it for me." She nodded. She was
standing next to his papaere, Piaerre noticed, refusing to admit that he
felt jealous.

The bosun raised his voice so that it would carry to the crowd outside.
"Captain's probably already figured out what's going on. My bet is, Jack
or one of the condors is already halfway here to tell us what's what.
'Til we know, there's nothing we can do, so I want you all to just go
about your business. Clean up what you can, fix anything that's broke..."
He paused a moment. "I'll say the *tehanu* for Fraederiq tomorrow
morning. Anyone wants to add anything to the pyre, talk to Gaeston
before then."

At that, the crowd began to break up, although no one seemed in a hurry
to get back to hoeing beans. Piaerre stared at the map. The Brumosos
curved across northern Cherne, then strode boldly down its east coast,
past Praczedt and Thind to the long peninsula of Barra Bantang. The blue
line showing the mountain's usual course ran from Mau Ngapcha in the
southeast to Normous Berth in the northwest. If Avaunt kept going
northeast instead, through the Brumosos, they'd could reach the sea in a
month. The sea! There probably weren't a hundred people on Avaunt who'd
ever seen the sea.

But what if it turned again? It could take them...anywhere. The enormity
of the thought dizzied him. The Staircase Kingdom at the East Pole, or
north, past Ruuda and the Herd of Trees to ice-bound Anuvatik---or it
could just keep flying forever.

The thought made his mouth go dry. Condors and griffins, clouds and the
occasional wild-eyed balloonist---they could carry news and a few light
luxuries up to the mountain, but not water. Rain and snow rarely fell on
Avaunt; once the great cisterns that lay inside the mountain ran dry, it
would only be a matter of time before people died of thirst.

He traced a line across the map with his finger east, past Sullair and
over the ocean. What if Avaunt went all the way to the Worldrim and just
kept going, past where the last stream fell forever into the void, past
the last rogue cloud blown far from its herd, and out into the void that
separated Cherne from the stars? Piaerre shivered. The world suddenly
seemed very small.

* * *

QueÃ§enne burst into tears when her mother told her what had happened to
Fraederiq. Chaentelle did too; Piaerre only half-noticed that she was
comforting his sister, rather than the other way around.

"You'd best go up to your lessons," Laeuc told his son, watching
helplessly as his wife gathered both of the teenage girls into her arms
and made soothing noises.

"I suppose," Piaerre said. It didn't seem right, practicing verbs when
someone he had known all his life had just died, but he couldn't think
of anything else to do. He felt like Chaentelle's slow-witted brother
Matthieu looked: a castaway in a world he would never really understand.

He trudged up Slip Street to the Captain's House, watching sidelong to
see if anyone's face changed when they caught sight of him. "It wasn't
my fault," he wanted to say, but who would he say it to?

The purple lumens in the Captain's House garden filled the air with a
wet peppery smell. *Someone should trim them back,* he thought absently.
The townspeople took turns caring for the house and its ground between
the captain's infrequent visits. It was a point of pride to keep it as
neat as their own homes.

Piaerre took a brick of dayglass from the tray in the garden, where he
had left it the night before to soak up the morning light, and went
inside. Unlacing his boots, he slipped his feet out of them and into the
fleece slippers that waited on the little shelf beside the door, then
went down three steps to the library.

Razi was sitting in his usual place at the narrow table that stretched
nearly the length of the library. The lantern next to his elbow shone
dull orange, its stored daylight exhausted, but the one at the other end
of the table was still a healthy yellow. "Good afternoon, bookster,"
Piaerre said, pulling the spent piece of dayglass from the first lantern
and putting in the fresh one.

Razi looked up from the origami book that lay unfolded on the table in
front of him. "Clear day. How are you feeling?"

Piaerre shrugged. He'd been trying not to ask himself that very
question. "Is that Bantangui?"

"*La*, so it is. A poem." Razi pushed it across to his apprentice.
Golden curlicues and ruby zigzags played around the elegant calligraphy
on the delicate mulberry-paper page. "The shapes and colors tell you
what you should feel as you read the poem. These green ones mean
sadness, and these ones, here, the sapphire dots? They are for irony.
Whatever the poem says, you're supposed to feel its opposite."

Piaerre gazed hungrily at the page in front of him, his remorse
momentarily forgotten. Every day was like this. Every day, the bookster
casually pulled a miracle off the shelf. He realized suddenly that Razi
was still waiting. "What does it say?"

Razi grinned. "That the writer feels woe, such woe as no man has ever
felt before, at his lover's departure. But *la*, the more woe he feels,
the more sapphire he uses." He folded the book up and dropped it into
the crate he referred to as the compost heap. If it had been
interesting, he would have had Piaerre catalog it and put it back on the
shelves that lined the library's walls. If it had been *really*
interesting, he would have spent an hour going through it, talking aloud
while Piaerre made notes and asked questions.

The captains of Avaunt had been retiring to Starboard Town for over two
hundred years. There were still crates in its attic that the house's
first occupant had brought with her unopened. In four months, Razi and
Piaerre had sorted the whole of one wall, and one shelf of a second.
Four more shelves and two more walls, and what Razi called "the easy
part" would be done. Then he would start the research he had actually
come to do in the first place. Where had each book come from? Who had
drawn each map, signed each contract, scribbled notes in the margin of
each old tax receipt? And what light could they cast on the centuries
immediately following the fall of the Uncertain Angels? "*La*,
everything that has happened since has been shaped by that time," Razi
had explained the first day Piaerre started work for him. "If we would
truly understand who we are, we must uncover those years."

He reached for another book, a small volume bound in faded red leather.
"Now this," he said, setting it in fromt of Piaerre, "*La*, this
actually is what it appears to be."

Piaerre tilted his head to the side. "*Unprofitable Speculations*," he
read slowly. "By His Balance, Eimin di CuayaÃ§edil."

"It is better pronounced '*Quay*-ya-se-*deel*'," the bookster corrected.
Holding down several of the colored strings tucked between its pages
with his thumb, he opened the book to the place another one marked.
"Here. The original text is on the left, in Aranese. The translation is
on the right, in Seyfertois. It is perhaps a little loftier than you are
used to, but *la*, see what you can make of it."

Piaerre scanned the first few lines. "And among the---Bantangui?" Razi
nodded. "Among the Bantangui, they believe that when people die, they
are reborn as themselves..." His voice trailed off.

"Go on," his teacher said mildly. "You're doing well."

Piaerre blinked. He was *not* going to start crying again. "They are
reborn as themselves, to live their lives over once again. This they
must do, time without number, until they have lived it full well. This
is why when something---what's that word?"

"It means, unwished for."

Piaerre nodded. "This is the reason why when something unwished for
happens, they say, *Im awa pfa ta*, which intends in their own tongue,
Oh no, not this again." Piaerre studied the page a moment longer before
looking up to meet his teacher's gaze. "Is this because of Fraederiq?"

Razi turned his hands palm up, then palm down, in his version of a
shrug. "There is more later, in the same vein. Eimin had reason to study
these questions once, and their answers. I thought perhaps you would
also."

Piaerre closed the book carefully. "Thank you." He set it to one side,
resting his hand on it for a moment while a dozen different feelings
tumbled over one another in his mind.

The bookster nodded. "So," he said, his voice suddenly brisk, "Today you
will finish with those deeds, yes? So that tomorrow we may move on to
something more interesting?"

"Yes, bookster." Piaerre opened the ledger he had been indexing for the
past week, drew a lamp closer, and set to work.

For the next three hours, the room was silent except for the scratching
of Piaerre's pen, the leaf-fall whisper of pages being turned, and the
occasional rumble from Piaerre's stomach. When these grew continuous,
the bookster raised his palms to his apprentice and yawned, "*La,*
enough, go and eat. I'll see you tomorrow."

*"Shalma'a,*" Piaerre replied , somewhat self-consciously, raising his
palms to his teacher in the Karabandi style.

"*Shalma'a,*" the bookster replied, smiling his usual melancholy smile
before bending his head over the old diary he had spent the greater part
of the afternoon deciphering. Piaerre traded his slippers for his boots,
shouldered his satchel, and let himself out quietly.

The horizon had already eaten half the sun; the fat orange blob that
remained looked like a ball of yarn someone had sat on. A herd of clouds
was passing in the distance, their bellies purple-gray with unshed rain.
If he had been at his grandfather's, Piaerre would have looked for their
shadows on the ground below.

Piaerre shivered. The mountain was never warm once the sun set, not even
when it was in the south. But the air smelled of pine logs burning in
kitchen stoves, and of squash, beans, and rabbit. All of a sudden he
remembered playing tag in the trees by the goat pasture above town:
himself, his sister, Chaentelle and her slow-witted brother Matthieu,
Fraederiq, the twins, Uego who had moved to Portside when his mother
remarried... None of them could have been more than seven or eight. The
mountain must have been near the equator, because darkness had fallen as
suddenly as a lid being put on a pot. They had laughed and joked a
little too loudly on their way back to town, until Fraederiq said, "I
can smell home." Laughing, they had raced each other the rest of the
way.

* * *

Three generations sat at the varnished pine table that Laeuc had made
his wife as a wedding present eighteen years before. The half-dozen
flutes he was carving to sell at Normous Berth had been moved to a
shelf, along with his knives, drills, and dowels. Steam rose lazily from
the scrambled eggs, onions, and tiny cubes of squash in the heavy clay
pot in the middle of the table. It was QueÃ§enne and Piaerre's favorite
meal, but both of them picked at it as if it were cauliflower.
QueÃ§enne's eyes were still red from crying. When Piaerre said, "I'm
sorry," she nodded without looking up.

The adults were as quiet as the children as they mopped up eggs with
slices of crumbly potato bread. There had been no word from the captain.
In its absence, speculation had swirled about all afternoon, leaving the
whole town exhausted in its wake.

Laeuc was doubly tired after sitting with Gaeston for an hour.
Fraederiq's father hadn't said much. In fact, he had hardly said
anything at all, besides, "Thanks," when Laeuc poured him his first
glass of Bantangui rum, and, "Leave the bottle, will you?" when Laeuc
rose to go.

"Well," Laeuc finally said, pushing his plate away. "So what does *sra*
bookster think of all this?"

Piaerre shrugged. "He doesn't know. He said if anything like this had
ever happened before, everybody would probably already know about it,
but he's going to double-check some books tonight."

"Good plan. Here, take him some of this." He pushed the stew crock
toward his son. "Be a shame to waste it. Your sister can clean up
tonight. Vurt? Why don't you and Elaiene go sit for a bit. I'll make
tea."

Having to scrape egg off her mother's precious cast-iron frying pan
clean would normally have sent QueÃ§enne into a blue sulk. That evening,
she just nodded and got up from her stool. Her mother reached for her as
she went by, but she stepped around Elaiene's attempt at a hug and
slipped quietly out through the back door. The frying pan clanged dully
against the side of their cistern. A moment later, the foursome inside
the house heard her sobbing quietly.

"I'll see to her," Elaiene said, rising. "Piaerre, make sure you wear
your coat. And your hat."

"I'm only going up the street," Piaerre protested.

"Do as your maere says," Laeuc sighed. Vurt just watched, his elbow on
the table and his chin on his fist.

The leftover stew and eggs went into a tubby round jar, along with two
pieces of bread and some goat cheese. Piaerre walked quickly up Slip
Street, oblivious to the dinner smells that filled the air as he played
Fraederiq's last moments over and over in his mind. The stiff breeze
chilled a patch of bare skin on the back of his neck, making him
suddenly glad for his coat.

Warm yellow light was still dribbling out between the slats of the
shutters over the library window when he reached the Captain's House. He
paused. Had he heard a voice? Curious, he stepped closer to the window.

The shutters were slightly ajar. Through them, he heard Razi speaking in
Karabandi, all esses and vees and doubled vowels. He paused, then spoke
again. Piaerre frowned. Who was the bookster talking to?

He stood on tiptoes, but the shutters' slats were angled upward too
sharply for him to see through. Razi spoke again. "*Iye*," he said,
"No." It was one of the few Karabandi words Piaerre knew.

Frustrated, he went around the corner and untied the leather cord that
held the door closed. He pushed it open as gently as he could, but it
creaked nonetheless. "Hello?" he said uncertainly. "Bookster? I've
brought you some dinner."

No one answered. Piaerre pulled off his flap-eared wool hat and rapped
his knuckles against the door frame. "Hello?"

"*Ayah*." A chair was pushed back. Razi's sandals slapped on the
pine-planked floor. A moment later, the bookster opened it and blinked
at him.

"*La*, Piaerre... Come in, come in." He turned and walked unsteadily back
to the table in the center of the room. An earthy smell, like incense,
hung in the air. Piaerre was shocked to see drops of sweat on the
bookster's shaven head. Everything he'd ever heard or read about
southern vices came rushing back to him.

"Bookster? Are you all right? My maere thought you might want some
dinner."

Razi nodded a little unsteadily. "Oh, yes, I'm fine. I was just
meditating. Thinking, *la*, so much to think about today, wasn't there?"
A thick candle stood on a square brass plate in the middle of the table.
Razi licked his thumb and finger and pinched out the faint wisp of smoke
coiling up from its wick. "*La*, that smells good. Please, to sit, to
sit. We'll talk while I eat."

He attacked the tepid stew and eggs as if he hadn't eaten in a week.
"Here," he said through a mouthful of food, pulling an old book with a
faded blue leather cover off the top of the pile on the table. "I found
this in the back just after you left. Have you seen it?"

Piaerre shook his head. "What is it?"

Razi turned it over and handed it open to Piaerre. "*La*, you tell me."

Piaerre studied it, trying to remember everything the bookster had
taught him to look for. The pages had been printed, so it was less than
a hundred and fifty years old. The typeface was spare and plain, which
cut the book's likely age in half. The language was Enswer, but there
was no binder's mark, so it had escaped the royal censor's inspection.

He studied the passage on the page before him, sounding the words out
carefully. "Sim---similarities between the tunnels in the mountain and
those beneath the---I don't know that word."

"Royal. Go on."

"The royal palace give cause to those who claim that the former is
of---what's this word?"

"Sound it out."

Piaerre's lips moved. "Unsure?"

"Uncertain."

"Uncertain Angels... I'm sorry, bookster, I don't know the next word
either."

Razi wiped the last of the stew from the pot with his finger, licked it
off, and dried his hand briskly on his sleeve. "*La*, no matter, you did
well. Here." He tapped the page. "She doesn't give her name, or say when
she was here, but she measured the tunnels inside the mountain, and
those in Ensworth and Colway. They have the same dimensions, you see?
The same height and width, the same distance between turnings. From
this, she argues that they were all made by the Uncertain Angels."

"Oh." Piaerre rubbed his knee. "I thought everyone knew that."

Razi shook his head. "Everyone *thinks* that. Thinking and having proof
are very different things." He hefted the book, then put it back on the
pile. "But *la*, enough of books for one evening. Would you like to walk
back down to my lodgings with me? Just so that I don't get lost?"

Razi was about as likely to get lost on Starboard Town's one street as
he was to grow wings and fly, but Piaerre was happy to take the hint. He
pulled his boots back on while Razi slipped his feet into his sturdy
leather sandals. As they walked down Slip Street, Razi had Piaerre say
words aloud in Enswer, reminding him every dozen steps to roll his r's
and soften his n's.

They stopped when they reached Mamaere Mayeule's. Razi had taken a room
in the back when he arrived, declining Laeuc and Elaiene's offer of
housing when he agreed to take Piaerre on as his apprentice. "Please
thank your parents for the eggs," Razi said. "They were delicious. I
shall see you tomorrow?"

"Yes, bookster. Good night."

"Good night." Light and noise spilled out onto the street as he opened
the door, along with a few respectful greetings. The room inside was as
packed as tightly as a shearing pen in spring. Voices swirled around,
each interrupting the one before, and were muffled again as the sturdy
door closed. Piaerre looked up. Diwei, the Western Star, should have
been almost directly above the chimney of the Captain's House. Instead,
it glittered a double handspan to the left. Thinking that he would
rather have had the stars move than the mountain change course, and
wishing there was still stew in the pot he was carrying to keep his
hands warm, he headed for home.

* * *

Yellowsday, Peridot 13^th^, dawned clear and cold. Most days did on
Avaunt; except during storms, the only clouds that flew higher than the
mountain were old gray bulls spread so thin that they could hardly be
seen.

But there were no gray bulls in the sky that morning, no stately white
heifers pillowed on top of one another, no streaky calves barely able to
hold themselves together. There was just the dark, empty sky, paling to
gray as the sun rose fifteen degrees away from where it should have.

Piaerre lay in bed and watched the curtain slowly brighten. It had taken
him hours to fall asleep. Over and over again, he replayed the morning's
events in his mind. If he had just put out his hand... Fraederiq's weight
might have pulled him off the mountain too, but maybe that would have
been better. Maybe then he'd be able to close his eyes without that
awful sick feeling churning his stomach until he started crying again.

He twitched at the sound of a lammergeier calling, somewhere high above.
Wiping his eyes, he threw back his quilt and stood up. Dawn had come. He
might as well make tea for his parents and sister.

As the sun rose, the people of Starboard Town gathered at a walled
garden on a small hill behind the Captain's House. It was a quiet, tidy
place, overlooked by the blue maples and braided pines that the
townspeople planted on their children's first naming days. Their
branches sheltered the garden's mossy stone wall from storms; any that
fell were cleaned up the same day. People took pride in being able to
point to their grandfather's grandmother's tree, which still stood
straight and tall. None remembered that the beams in Starboard Town's
first houses had been made from the naming day trees of the Hett who had
lived there before them.

Everyone wore their best clothes, but came barefoot. No one could have
told you why---it was just how things were done. Women brought their
babies on their hips, while the town's oldest man, Papaere Badette, was
carried up the hill in a wicker chair. Dull-eyed, and wrapped in a long
black coat whose wide sleeves had gone out of style thirty years before,
he looked like a strange, solemn bird.

The bosun had worked since midnight to build a small pyre of pine logs
on the heavy gray stones at the garden's center. He stood beside it in
the blue coat trousers of his office, his square black hat tucked under
his arm, and nodded to people as they took their places at the wall. No
one spoke except the smallest children, who were immediately hushed.

Gaeston was the last to arrive. His cheeks were dry, his eyes clear. In
his hands he held a stuffed toy goat, a tiny pair of sandals whose soles
had been worn thin by countless adventures in the village's gardens, and
the embroidered shirt that Fraederiq had worn on his sixteenth naming
day a few months before. Piaerre's heart twisted at the sight of it. He
remembered Fraederiq standing as straight as a piece of bamboo as he
swore to observe Avaunt's laws, and to obey the captain and his
appointed officers in all matters related thereunto, in peril of his
soul's rest. He had stumbled a little over "thereunto", but had nearly
split his cheeks smiling when the bosun clapped him on the shoulder and
ordered him to turn out for militia practice with the other men.

Gaeston set Fraederiq's things on the pitch-smeared logs. Moving as
stiffly as a marionette, he straightened up and took a blue silk hair
ribbon from his pocket. As he laid it on the pyre, Piaerre heard Laeuc
whisper, "But that's---!"

"Sh!" Elaiene dug her husband in the ribs with her elbow to quiet him,
but her eyes were with Piaerre's on QueÃ§enne, whose renewed sobbing told
the whole town who the hair ribbon had belonged to. For a moment,
Piaerre saw something ugly struggle with the grief on Chaentelle's face,
but then her own tears swelled up once again, and the two girls clung to
each other as if they were drowning.

Gaeston stepped back and saluted the bosun. The bosun returned the
salute gravely. Hungry and cold, a baby began to cry. "What? What?"
Papaere Badette asked. His granddaughter shushed him gently.

Gaeston took the smoldering torch the bosun handed him, held it high for
everyone to see, and touched it to the logs. The crowd held its breath.
The flame hesitated a moment, then took hold and began to spread.
Everyone exhaled with relief, except the hungry baby, who was still
crying. The flame had caught; Fraederiq was at rest.

Dark smoke painted a message of loss and grief on the sky. The bosun
cleared his throat and spoke the words.

"When I die, I shall breathe back the breath that made me live. I shall
give back to the world all that I didn't do. All that I might have been
and wasn't. All the choices I didn't make. All the things I lost and
spent and wasted. I shall give them back to the world. To the lives that
haven't been lived yet. That will be my gift back to the world that gave
me the life I did live, the life I loved, the breath I breathed."

Around him, the people of Starboard Town bowed their heads and repeated,
"That will be my gift." In twos and threes and families, they turned
toward home, leaving Gaeston to tend his son's last fire.

Laeuc put his hand on Piaerre's shoulder and squeezed. "Come on," he
said.

Piaerre shook his head. "I want to stay."

His father shook him gently. "This isn't for you. It's for Gaeston. And
I don't think he'll want you around."

Piaerre wiped his eyes on his sleeve. "I know," he said wretchedly, his
throat aching from the effort of not sobbing aloud. "I'm sorry. I should
have--- I should have---"

"Shush." His father shook him again, dry-eyed, but as miserable as his
son. "It wasn't your fault. Now come on. You can come back later and
help clean up the ashes if you want. All right?" Gently but firmly,
Laeuc turned his son toward home.

As they walked away, Piaerre heard Vurt clear his throat. "Remember," he
told Elaiene gruffly, "My turn comes, you send a pinch of my ashes back
to Coriandel, and put the rest up by your maere."

"I promise," his daughter said, her thoughts still on her own daughter's
heartbroken sobs.

Most people spent that morning repairing the minor damage the mountain's
shudders had caused. A few talked about Fraederiq---what a shame, so
young, what would Gaeston do now, it would be terrible if he started
drinking again---but it seemed as though their conversations had minds of
their own. Poor Fraederiq... poor Gaeston... but honestly, where do you
think the mountain is going? And shouldn't we be doing something, just
in case we *do* crash into the Brumosos? Well, no, I don't know what,
exactly, but surely there's something we can---yes, I'm sure the captain's
thought of all of this, but...

Just after noon, when most people were in their houses eating soup and
fried squash, a blue and yellow parrot winged into town and settled on
the sill of Bosun Uyves' front window. He cocked his head one way, then
the other. Satisfied that none of the town's cats were anywhere nearby,
he rapped his beak sharply against the window's shutter. "Uyves!" he
squawked. "Uyves, open up!"

Inside, a feminine voice whispered a panicky question. A deeper voice
answered. There was the sound of clothes hastily being donned, then a
creak and a soft bang as a rear door opened and closed. A moment later,
the shutter flew open.

"Clear day, Jack," the bosun said brightly, buttoning his shirt.

"Clear day," the parrot replied. He imitated a cough. "Sorry for
interrupting."

"Ah, not to worry." His buttons done, the bosun leaned on the sill.
"Just offering some comfort to one in need, as it were."

"Of course," the parrot said drily.

Uyves watched the kites flying overhead for a moment. "You, um, you
sharing your nest with anyone these days, Jack?"

After a moment's hesitation, the parrot bobbed his head. "Aye. She came
on board at Mau Ngapcha."

"Oh? Well, good for you. Mind me asking what her name is?"

"Doesn't have one. She's not Gifted."

"No?"

"Nope." Jack's version of shaking his head was two quick twitches left
and right. "Gifted birds aren't as common as stories would have you
believe."

"Mm. Well, then it's a good thing you lot don't mind having ungifted
mates."

Jack scratched the side of his head with a claw. "Aye. And I suppose
it's a good thing for you that so many women on Avaunt feel the same
way."

The bosun's laugh nearly filled the street.

Ten minutes later, he stood at the top of Slip Street, his hat firmly on
his head. "Gather all, gather all!" he bellowed, pounding the town's
assembly drum in time with his words. "Gather all and hearken!"

The townspeople assembled quickly. A few said hellos to the parrot, who
bobbed his head at them in return from his perch on the Captain's House
gate.

"Morning, Jack." Mamaere Mayeule held out her hand. "Dried plum?"

"Don't mind if I do," the parrot said, deftly beaking it off her palm.

"Right, quiet down," the bosun said to the crowd. "Quiet down, everyone.
Jack here has word from the captain. Jack?"

"Thank you, bosun." The parrot spread its wings and settled them again
with a ruffle of feathers. "Well. You all know what happened yesterday.
That means you know as much as anyone does. The captain had no warning,
and doesn't know where we're headed. We could be back on course
tomorrow, or not."

He raised his voice over the crowd's murmurs. "The immediate problem is
water. There's enough in the tanks to get us through to Carnelian, or
even to Chalcedony, but only if we're careful about how much we use. So,
orders are," his voice changed to imitate the captain's, "No water for
vanity gardens, or for boiling dyes or dagging wool."

The crowd's murmurs grew louder. "I know, I know," Jack said in his own
voice. "He doesn't like it any more than you do, but until we have a
better idea of what's happening, those are his orders."

"Do you want us to stop bathing, too?" a voice called out.

The bosun spoke up quickly. "What difference would that make to you,
Donaien?"

A few people laughed. Donaien crossed his arms and scowled. Beside him,
Armaend uncrossed his. "What about evacuation?" he asked loudly.

The crowd stilled. The bosun and the parrot glanced at each other. "What
*about* evacuation?" the parrot asked.

"You said we'd be all right until Chalcedony, but what if we haven't
berthed somewhere by then? Even if we stop watering the fields, we'll be
dry by Tourmaline. Any idea how we're going to get ten thousand people
down to the ground if that happens?"

The parrot fixed his beady stare on Armaend and held it until the
townsman flushed and dropped his gaze. "Nobody is going to 'evacuate'
anything," Jack said. His rasping voice carried clearly on the gentle
midday breeze. "I've lived on this mountain eighty-three years, chick
and bird. It's always found berth, and until we see otherwise, I'm going
to trust it to find berth again."

"Easy for you to say," someone muttered behind Piaerre. "You can always
just fly away."

Jack scratched the side of his head briskly with a claw. "So, unless
there are questions? Right. Bosun?"

Bosun Uyves' chest swelled as he took a deep breath. "Disss...missed!"

As the crowd began to break up, the parrot squawked, "Bookster? A word?"
The dark Karabandi had been standing next to Piaerre and his family, a
thoughtful expression on his face.

"Of course," Razi said. "Piaerre?"

"Um, what?" The boy blinked.

Razi raised his eyebrows. "You *are* my apprentice, aren't you?"

Piaerre glanced at his parents. "Go ahead," his father said. Piaerre
followed his teacher and the bosun into the Captain's House.

They gathered around a small map that Razi had found in a book on the
medicinal properties of fungi. "Not much room for us to get through, is
there?" the bosun said, tapping the inverted V's that marked the extent
of the Brumosos.

The bookster shrugged. "*La*, perhaps it is not so bad. There are many
passes through the mountains---perhaps we will go through one of those.
*Sra* parrot, does the captain perhaps have more detailed maps in
Forecastle?"

"Don't know, but I'll ask. And just call me 'Jack', bookster. Never been
much of one for titles."

Razi inclined his head. "Jack, then. And if I might ask another
question? The captain's wife---did she feel anything yesterday?"

The parrot shook his head. "Not that anyone's told me. Far as I know,
her magic's all about healing."

"*La*, yes, of course." Razi closed the book and set it aside. "Well,
please convey my greetings to the captain, then. I hope you have an
uneventful flight."

The bosun left with Jack on his shoulder. Piaerre closed the door behind
them. "What do you think will happen if there isn't a pass big enough?"
he asked. "Will we crash?"

Razi shrugged. "*La*, who can know? The mountain flies higher over Darp
than it does at Mau Ngapcha or Normous Berth. Perhaps it will fly higher
still when we reach the Brumosos. Or perhaps 'crashing' is the wrong way
to think of it. Perhaps the mountain is in season to mate."

He grinned boyishly at the look on Piaerre's face. "Oh, come, I cannot
be the only one to think of that? Perhaps the mountain is like a goat in
spring. Stranger things have happened."

"Not around here," Piaerre muttered, embarrassed.

Razi laughed. "*La*, well, just in case we survive, I think you should
keep working on your Praczny. I know it is not used so much at Normous
Berth as Enswer or Ruudian, but the exercise will do you good. Here---you
see how many new words for places you can learn in the time it takes me
to shelve the rest of these books."

"Yes, *sra*." Piaerre took the tattered blue-and-yellow Praczny
dictionary from its place on the shelf by the window, pulled the
dayglass lantern closer, and settled into his chair.

"Begin with the word for 'pass'," Razi suggested as he picked up an
armload of books. "Since that is what we hope the mountain finds."

Piaerre opened the dictionary uncertainly. "I'm sorry, bookster, I don't
where to start," he confessed.

"*La*, so, start with a word you already know, like 'mountain', and see
how it's defined."

Piaerre flipped through the pages. "A mass of rock that---, um, hang on."
He flipped the pages again, pursed his lips, and flipped back. "A mass
of rock that rises above its surroundings, and is bigger than a hill."

"Good. Now, write down the words that might lead you to 'pass'. 'Hill'
is a good one---see how that's defined, and keep going from one word to
the next."

Piaerre looked at his teacher helplessly. "But that could take forever!"

"Yes, it could." Razi slid another book back into its place on the
shelf. "But sometimes that's just what you have to do."

* * *

Piaerre chased words up one blind alley and down another all afternoon
while Razi reshelved books. Every once in a while he paused, grunted,
and set a book on the table instead. Gradually, they became a rough map
of Cherne: those from Ruuda at the north end, those from Ini Bantang and
Barra Bantang at the south, the Enswer and Seyfertois books on the west
side, and a scant handful from Praczedt and Thind to the east. A lone
volume of Karabandi poetry occupied the center.

The dozenth time Piaerre looked up, two glinting pieces of brass caught
his eyes. "What are those for?" he asked, pointing at the coins that lay
on the slim leather-bound collection of love songs and laments.

"Ah. I thought to add some landmarks to my map. That one is for
Ossisswe. The other is Coriandel. You see?" He picked them up and handed
them to Piaerre. The first was square, with a lantern stamped on one
side and the date "1241" on the other. The second was round, with a hole
punched through it. A hatched pattern framed the hole on both sides, put
there, Piaerre had learned, to deter trimmers from taking metal off the
coin's edges.

"Wait." Piaerre replaced the coins, then fished a smooth gray pebble out
of his pocket that he had put there several days ago for some
now-forgotten reason. "Avaunt," he said, setting it down a double
handspan from the coins. It seemed very small.

They worked through the last of the afternoon, pausing only to answer
the call of nature. For a time, someone chopped firewood outside, and
someone else trundled a cart past the Captain's House, but the only
sounds in the library were those of pages being turned, and chairs
creaking as their occupants shifted their weight.

A knock on the door made them both start. "Hello?" Laeuc called. "Anyone
aboard?"

Piaerre pushed his chair back and hurried to open the door. Laeuc
tousled his son's hair as he came down the steps into the library. "Am I
interrupting?" he asked.

*"La,* not at all. Please, come in," Razi said, standing and raising his
palms.

Laeuc raised his own palms a little self-consciously to mirror the
Karabandi's. "I, um." He hesitated. "Saints, but there's a lot of books
here, isn't there?"

"Well, it *is* a library," Piaerre said.

"Ah. Right." One corner of Laeuc's mouth twitched. "Anyway, I just came
to say, a flock of us got to talking, and we've decided to head up to
Forecastle tomorrow to pick up some supplies. You know, just in case. I
was wondering if you two would like to come along."

Razi pursed his lips for a moment, then nodded. "Certainly. I could use
some more ink and paper, and *la,* some fresh air would do your son some
good too."

"I'm sure it would," Laeuc agreed, looking at his son's bleary eyes.
"We're wanting an early start---would dawn be all right with you?"

"Of course."

Laeuc raised an eyebrow at his son. "You just about ready for dinner?"

"Sure." Piaerre tucked his scribbled notes into the dictionary.
"Bookster? Do you need anything?"

"Just some more water, thank you," Razi said, handing his apprentice the
leather canteen he had been sipping from throughout the day.

Piaerre refilled the canteen at the pump that stood twenty strides
uphill from the gate to the Captain's House and returned it to the
bookster with a final good night. Walking home beside his father,
Piaerre suddenly asked, "What did you mean, 'just in case'?"

"Hm?"

"Back in the library. You said people were going up to Forecastle just
in case."

"Oh, that." His father shrugged. "I don't know. People got to talking
about Vaszlav's last visit, and how they'd all wanted something he
didn't have, and, well, it just seemed like a good idea to get to the
market. Just in case."

"Oh." They fell silent again, Piaerre thinking about what 'in case'
meant. 'In case' the mountain didn't come to berth for weeks, or even
months. 'In case' things grew scarce.

As if he'd read his son's mind, Laeuc said, "Don't worry. The mountain's
always taken care of us. It won't let us down now."

"I'm not worried," Piaerre lied. "Are maere and QueÃ§enne coming too?"

"Not this time. Your maere says she wants to finish hoeing the squash,
and QueÃ§enne... I don't think she feels like going anywhere just now."

They walked the rest of the way home in silence. As they rounded the big
bend in Slip Street, Piaerre caught sight of Niquolas emptying the
contents of a compost bucket in his family's back yard. He raised a hand
to wave, but Niquolas turned away and pretended not to see him.

After dinner was over and he had scraped the dishes clean, Piaerre went
up to his room and slid under his quilt. He lay there for a moment,
looking---really looking---at his room for the first time he could remember.
The wood-and-leather toys on the shelf by the window seemed to have
shrunk. Maybe his mother was right: maybe it was time to pass them on to
someone else.

He sighed and picked up the book Razi had given him. On impulse, he let
it fall open at random. *So often, we choose not to see our true reasons
for acting,* he read, puzzling out the Seyfertois words. *Some desire
that would shame us to name guides our hand, then retreats into its dark
cave at the back of our mind, out of sight of our waking awareness, so
that we may say, the thing was an accident, or, I did not mean to be
overheard, but yet eat the sweet fruit of the action. In this, we are as
kings who, by a nod or a silence, make known their desire that some evil
be done, but do not risk troubled sleep by seeing the deed itself.*

A chill danced across his shoulders. "The thing was an accident," he
whispered aloud. Had he let Fraederiq fall on purpose? The bullying,
Chaentelle... Had some part of him *wanted* Fraederiq to die?

Suddenly angry, he tossed the book across the room and pulled the quilt
up over his head. It was a stupid idea. He hadn't liked Fraederiq, but
that didn't mean---that didn't make him a murderer.

He tossed and turned for hours. When sleep finally came, it brought a
new nightmare. This time, Fraederiq and Niquolas were dangling him out
the upstairs back window at Mamaere Mayeule's. One boy held each of his
legs; each time he tried to grab the window sill, they relaxed their
grip for a moment, make him whimper with terror. It had actually
happened, a year or so ago. Niquolas had eventually said he was tired of
the game, and insisted that they pull him in. In his dream, though,
Piaerre was hanging over the edge of the mountain, looking backward and
down at a pair of giant hands rising from the plain to catch him.
Somehow, he knew they wouldn't. When he fell, the hands would pull back
to let him shatter and ooze on the hard ground like a dropped egg.

He woke with a small cry. Dizzy with sweat, he fixed his eyes on his
dayglass lamp and waited for dawn.

* * *

Greensday, Peridot 14^th^. Starboard Town woke to discover that the
mountain had sped up during the night. The steady half-gallop-an-hour
breeze of its passage had grown stronger. It blew people's hair back,
rattled doors, and made chickens restless in their coops. Branches
rustled against each other nervously, while overhead, the town's kites
jerked on their strings as if trying to escape.

For the people gathering in front of Mamaere Mayeule's for the trek to
Forecastle, the mountain speeding up was somehow even worse than it
changing direction. The steady whisper of the wind flying past it had
been part of their lives from the day they were born. Now it seemed to
be saying, "Trouble's on his way."

"It ain't right," Donaien said to Armaend, staring out their kitchen
window, the morning's spiced tea cooling in a pot on the table between
them.

Armaend shook his head. "Ain't right at all." He poured a mug, stirred
in some honey, and drained it in one noisy gulp. "Come on. Time to go."

Piaerre and his father were almost the last ones to join the crowd.
Elaiene had spotted a stain on Laeuc's shirt too faint to be seen by
male eyes, and insisted that he change. And while your father's doing
that, Piaerre, can't you please comb your hair? Yes, I know you're going
to be wearing your hat all day, what has that got to do with it?
Honestly... So Piaerre dragged a comb through his wiry hair while Laeuc
changed into his other shirt, kissed his wife, hugged his unresponsive
daughter, then bounded upstairs one more time to fetch the flutes he
hoped to sell in Forecastle.

"Right," he said cheerfully as he clattered back down to the door. "You
have everything?"

Piaerre sighed. "Yes, paere."

The corner of Laeuc's mouth twitched. "You sure?" Piaerre just rolled
his eyes.

Out on the street, they stopped for a moment to let their eyes adjust to
the cold morning light. The crowd milling about in front of Mamaere
Mayeule's was a lot larger than Piaerre had expected. It seemed his
father wasn't the only one who was worried about 'in case'.

"There's Razi," Piaerre said. "Can we walk with him?"

"Sure." Laeuc nodded hellos to his friends, some as fresh as he was,
others, like the bosun, bleary-eyed and grumpy.

Forecastle was only four gallops for Jack the parrot, but the narrow
track that connected it to Starboard Town was as twisted as an arthritic
snake. It would take the Starboard Towners most of the day to get to
Forecastle; they would have only a couple of hours in the market before
the sun set, then another hour or two the next day before starting the
return journey.

"Right then," the bosun said loudly. "Those coming, let's be off. The
rest of you, don't get into any trouble while I'm not here to enjoy it."
Shouldering his pack, he set off at a brisk walk.

It seemed to Piaerre as though everyone who wasn't actually going was
was up to watch the travelers leave. Seized by sudden misgivings, a few
people pulled on boots and coats, threw a few odds and ends in a
satchel, kissed their husbands or wives goodbye, and joined the flock
trailing after the bosun.

Standing in the doorway of his house, Gaeston watched them go by
impassively. Laeuc and a few others waved and said good morning, but
Gaeston made no reply. From the look of his hair and clothes, he hadn't
washed since his son's funeral; the dark green bottle in his hand could
have been half full or half empty. He watched the little parade go by,
then went back inside. The door closed behind him with a bang.

Half a gallop out of town, past the last beanfield, Forecastle Road
climbed a dark shoulder of granite to the town's upper goat pasture.
Conversation died as the travelers spent their breath on the steep ups
and downs. A pair of red-billed steelbirds kept pace with them for a
time, clacking their beaks to warn the Avauntois away from their nest; a
rabbit exploded across the path to disappear into a clump of salal no
safer than the one it had left. Boot soles clomped on stone while the
wind slipped cold fingers down the travelers' collars, toying with their
scarves and rustling the branches around them.

Piaerre was sweating by the time they reached the pasture. Pine branches
woven through sturdy uprights closed off two of its sides. Goats bleated
behind the prickly wall, their brown and white shapes half-visible
through the barrier. The cliff that formed the pasture's third side was
too steep even for them to climb, although a creeping vine from the
jungle below Mau Ngapcha had made a nest just out of reach of their
hungry mouths. Piaerre paused a moment to watch it wave its
sweetly-scented flowers at a rabbit. Come closer, come closer, they
seemed to beckon. Come to me... The rabbit scampered away.

The road narrowed beyond the pasture, forcing the townspeople to walk
single file. It cut back and forth like Slip Street as it climbed. "Need
to fix that," the bosun grunted, shaking a wobbly pine railing with his
hand. Laeuc just nodded. Despite his protests, Elaiene had insisted that
he carry waterproofs for himself and Piaerre, and he was puffing under
their weight. He'd walked to Forecastle and back in a single day once to
get his wife a naming day present. He didn't remember puffing so hard
then...

They stopped to rest when the road leveled off. Piaerre turned and
looked back the way they had come. The treetops below him were a deep
green blanket thrown over the mountain's side. All he could see of
Starboard Town was the roof of the Captain's House, and a few household
kites. In the distance, a herd of clouds was raining on the plains
below. *At least *they* have water*, Piaerre thought.

"Do you think they know?" he asked no one in particular. "Down below, I
mean. That we're off course?"

"They know," the bosun said firmly. "Can't move a mountain around
without people noticing."

Razi nodded. Sweat gleamed on his shaven scalp, but other than that, he
seemed as fresh as he had an hour before. Despite the die-hard patches
of snow lurking among the rocks, he wore no socks, just his thick-soled
desert sandals, though he had tied the wrist strings of his *deel*, and
belted it more tightly around his waist. "*La*," he said, smiling, "It
will be like the tale of the camel in the crib. There will be
meetings---kings and princes, ministers and magicians, all twittering at
each other like birds. What does it mean, who will advantage by it...
Heh." He sniggered like a little boy who has heard a dirty joke.

"Glad you find it funny," Donaien said a little sourly. "Can't say I see
the joke myself."

Razi spread his hands. "I am sorry if I give offense. But I spent some
years as a clerk in the court at Armaq when I was younger, and oh, they
are all so serious. Even when there is nothing they can do, they must
write each other letters, and say important things." He laughed
suddenly. "*La*, perhaps *especially* when there is nothing they can do.
Like the King of Seyferte and the three pigs. Do you know the story?"
Donaien shook his head. "No? Well, if I may as we walk?"

Donaien shrugged. "Never one to say no to entertainment." He picked up
his pack again and waved Razi on. "After you."

Razi dipped his head. "Thank you. Now, many of my stories are not true,
but this is a true story. The king in question, Erard, was a very fat
man..."

A hundred strides later Piaerre's ears were burning. He was glad his
mother wasn't there, although the women within earshot were laughing as
hard as the men. When Razi started imitating voices---the squeaky Minister
of Law, saying that the pigs would have to marry, and the stuttering
Minister of Rumors, saying that her desk had never been so clean---the
bosun had to lean against trees and hold his sides.

"So you see," Razi finished ten minutes later, ducking a low-hanging
branch, "You are very lucky, here on your mountain. You have a captain,
*la*, who is wise enough to know that if he cannot steer his ship, he
should not pretend to, and a bosun in each town to make sure boys spend
their days pulling up weeds instead of getting into trouble---"

"Doesn't seem to stop them," the bosun said, still chuckling.

Razi shrugged. "*La*, would anything? Boys are boys. But come, my
manners. I have burdened you with a story---perhaps I could carry one of
yours in return?"

"Do you know how Papaere Vurt lost his foot?" Piaerre asked before
anyone else could speak. When Razi shook his head, Piaerre pointed up
the mountain's side. "It was just up there, in one of the old tunnels.
Bosun Uyves' father was there---he was a bosun's mate, wasn't he, bosun?"

"Yes he was." Uyves rubbed the damp out of his moustache, looking
uphill. "It was, what, forty years ago? Forty-one, now..."

*The bonescuttle whose skull would eventually hang in Vurt's cottage was
the reason Vurt came to Avaunt in the first place. They were patient
creatures, slow-moving until prey was in reach, then fast enough to run
down frightened horses. No one on the mountain knew how this one had
found its way onto the mountain---an egg lying unnoticed in a sack of
chocolate beans, perhaps, or some angry Bantangui merchant's trying to
sabotage a rival. It just appeared one day, fully grown and very
hungry.*

*It took goats at first, dragging them back to its lair to dismember,
then lying hidden until hunger drove it to hunt again. Then it took a
nine-year-old Hett boy, the son of tinkers who had made camp halfway
between Forecastle and Starboard Town. A few people said, "Better them
than our goats," and more thought it without saying it, but they all
knew that the bonescuttle wouldn't care whether the next child it took
was Hett or not.*

*So Forecastle's chief bosun and several of his mates went hunting.
Tracking the bonescuttle was easy---it had scattered blood and snippets of
the boy's body among the trees. But the trail led to the mouth of an old
tunnel, and that was where the bosun and his men stopped. Like all
Avauntois, they had spent their lives under an open sky, with the whole
world spread out below them. They stored chocolate, steel, and other
trade goods in the shallowest tunnels, and used the deeper ones to hold
water for their crops, but the thought of actually going in there... Of
having such a weight of stone over their heads... Of the bonescuttle,
lurking in the darkfor them to step into an unseen hole and twist an
ankle... No. Unable to meet one another's eyes, the bosun and his men
turned back. This wasn't a job for an Avauntois.*

*Vurt was twenty-four then. His parents had died the year before when
the scribbling fever swept across the Karaband. They had left him a
small house and a rat catching business whose clients were as poor as
they had been.*

*Unable to bear the house's emptiness, Vurt sold it for half what it had
been worth a year before---it was a poor market, when so many stood empty.
He gave most of what he was paid to a furniture importer whose caravan
was raided just a gallop past the twin cairns that marked the boundary
of Coriandel's law. What little was left went to the jurist Vurt hired
after he discovered that the chief of the 'bandits' was the furniture
importer's brother-by-marriage.*

*With months to go before the case reached court, he decided to follow
in his old teacher's footsteps and become a caravan guard. He was on his
way to Tomb Hill to look for a master when he saw a palace clerk
painting a notice on the wall in Six Ears Square. The Captain of Avaunt...
a bonescuttle... silver... passage there and back to be provided by the emir
to any qualified applicant...*

*Passage there and back... He looked up at the blue sky over his head, and
thought, why not? He'd killed one of the things before.*

*The next morning, he found himself on the back of a small cloud,
sweating in the heavy coat and fleece-lined trousers that the emir's
clerk swore he would need once he reached the mountain. She had agreed
that Vurt was a logical choice: after all, he and his teacher *had* been
the ones who...? "Yes, eminence," Vurt said. "We're the ones who killed
it." Explaining what had *actually* happened would have just confused
her.*

*He cried out in wonder and fear when the cloud rose into the air. He
had played on Coriandel's rooftops, and climbed trees, but this---this was
how the sun and the moon saw the world. "First time?" the cloudherd
sitting next to him asked.*

*"Yup."*

*"Well, if you're going to sick up, do it over the side. Bluebell here,
she hates being puked on."*

*The cloud bunched into a dense woolly puff as she lifted her marveling
passenger into the sky. He saw the silver pools of water that nestled
between the white roofs of the city, the tan and green fields outside
its walls, a caravan winding its way north toward Ossisswe. And there, a
speck flying in the distance, their destination: Avaunt.*

*The mountain swelled and swelled as they approached it, until Vurt felt
that *he* was the speck. It was enormous, so clearly impossible that the
eye refused to believe it was real. Its irregular peak was stone gray
and ice bright; its lower reaches were dense with dark green pines. And
there, directly ahead, lay a town, clinging to the mountain's side like
a burr to a camel.*

*The cloudherd set him down by a goat pasture. Bunched together at the
fence in the hope that he might have carrot greens for them, the goats
watched as he shouldered his bags and went looking for someone who could
tell him what he was supposed to do next. Behind him, the cloud lifted
into the sky once again.*

*The first villager Vurt met didn't speak Karabandi. Neither did the
second, or the third. It wasn't until he pulled a steel trap out of his
bag and waved it in their faces that the Avauntois realized their savior
had arrived.*

*Vurt spent the next three days setting traps for the bonescuttle. It
didn't take him long to realize how much the Avauntois disliked the
tunnels. Truth be told, he didn't like them either. They reminded him of
the night he had spent beneath Coriandel, hunting his first bonescuttle.
The way their floors and walls and ceilings were tilted out of true made
it worse, giving each of his trips underground a nightmare feeling. At
some point in the distant past, the mountain had tipped part way over on
its side; what had been floors were now ramps, and stairs were saw-edged
ankle traps.*

*Vurt was setting the last of his traps when word came that the
bonescuttle had taken another goat. Grim-faced, Starboard Town's bosun
led Vurt to the scene. The bonescuttle had cut through the thorny wall
around the pasture. A drying pool of blood showed where its pincers had
done the same to the goat's neck. More blood speckled a fresh, shallow
furrow that led to half of the goat's remains.*

*Vurt put his hand on the carcass. It was still warm. He looked
helplessly at the woods around them. He had spent his whole life in
Coriandel---he didn't know what to look for in the forest. "What way go?"
he asked the bosun in bad Avauntois.*

*The bosun pointed. Vurt stood and stood, wiping his hand on his
trousers. "Good. I follow."*

*The bonescuttle's trail led to a tunnel mouth. The bushes growing
around it seemed undisturbed, but one of the bosun's mates pointed and
said something too quickly for Vurt to follow. Looking closer, he saw
scratches on the tunnel's stone mouth where the creature had sharpened
its pincers.*

*Vurt unslung his crossbow. Its quarrels were tipped with steel barbs
that hooked cruelly backward. His father had bought them as a set years
before, but had never used them. He ran a quick loop of spider silk
through the eyelet at the quarrel's base, knotted it, and handed the
rest of the coil to the bosun. "Good?" Vurt asked.*

*The bosun shook his head. "No. Let's go." The two villagers he had
brought with him hefted their spears and followed them into the tunnel.*

*Twenty strides in, Vurt raised his hand for them to stop. Up ahead, he
heard the sound of pincers stripping flesh from a goat's leg to make
morsels small enough for a tiny mouth.*

*Vurt swore under his breath. If they unshuttered a lantern now, the
bonescuttle would just run. He tapped the bosun on the shoulder. "I
pull, you light, yes?" he whispered, twitching the silk line trailing
from his quarrel to illustrate.*

*The bosun raised his fist to his ear and nodded. Praying that meant, "I
understand," Vurt edged forward gingerly into the darkness, one foot on
the tilted floor, the other braced on the steeply-angled wall beside
it.*

*The sound ahead of him suddenly stopped. Vurt raised his crossbow to
his shoulder. As he did so, the silk line brushed against his elbow. The
bosun felt the twitch in his hands and hissed, "Now!" The two men behind
him opened the shutters on their lanterns.*

*The bonescuttle froze in the sudden light, blinking its too-human eyes.
Its scorpion tail twitched above its back, and then it charged.*

*"Oh, *saad*!" Vurt cursed. He fired. The arrow hit the bonescuttle with
a crack. "Pull!" Vurt yelled. "Pull pull pull!" He swung his crossbow at
the bonescuttle's head like an ax. As it bounced off, the bonescuttle
caught Vurt's left leg in one pincer.*

*Vurt screamed and fell backward, screaming again as the bonescuttle cut
to the bone. As he scrabbled for his knife, the bosun and his men pulled
on the spider silk line, dragging the bonescuttle on top of him. He
covered his head with his arms as its fleshless legs stabbed the stone
on either side of him, then stabbed up between the plates on the
monster's belly. Screaming in terror, he hooked his right leg over its
back, pulled his knife free, and stabbed it again.*

*The next thing he knew, the bosun was dragging him out of the tunnel.
"Is it? Is it?" Vurt gasped, not knowing the Avauntois word for "dead".*

*One of the men raised his lantern. Its light glistened off the thick
dark ooze dripping from the head he held in his other hand. Vurt nodded
and fainted.*

*The emir's doctors in Coriandel could have saved his nearly-severed
leg. The people of Starboard Town couldn't. Vurt lay in bed shaking with
fever for a week. When he woke, the bosun's sister was sitting on a
stool beside his cot, grinding herbs with a pestle and mortar. She
soaked the bandages on his stump in warm water to loosen them, then
unwrapped them, slowly and carefully, so that she could pack more herbs
onto the bloody ruin below his knee. He said, "Thank you" in Karabandi,
and slept again.*

*By the time he was well enough to stand, he had learned how to say,
"Thank you," in Avauntois, and a great many other things as well. They
sat for hours on the balcony of the small room the town had given him,
looking down the steep, twist-back street to the world slowly moving by
below. Coriandel was three hundred gallops behind them. The desert had
given way to chaparral, which was itself turning into the forest that
covered the northern arch of the Brumoso Mountains. When Vurt asked his
nurse how to say, "I would like to marry you," she laughed, and kissed
him for the first time.*

Razi nodded through the bosun's story, while Laeuc, Piaerre, and
everyone else walking within earshot chipped in with corrections and
elaborations. He was frowning by the time Uyves finished.

"*La*, and no one ever found out where it came from?"

Uyves glanced at Laeuc. "Not that I ever heard of."

Laeuc shook his head. "Nor me."

"Did anyone ever go to see if the creature had left any eggs?"

The bosun cleared his throat. "Vurt did. After he was walking, I mean.
He went back into the tunnel to bring out the bones of the Hett boy.
Never heard him that say he found anything else."

"I didn't know he went back," Piaerre said.

"Someone had to," the bosun said. "No reason to think the boy would turn
haunt, but no point taking chances."

The travelers fell silent after that. They were above the treeline, and
the wind was bitterly cold. Each breath was a cloud of steam; tiny ice
crystals formed in nostrils. Everyone except Razi had put on gloves, and
pulled the flaps of their hats down over their ears.

"Do you want to borrow one of my sweaters?" Piaerre asked.

The bookster smiled. "*La*, thank you, but no. The desert is as cold as
this at night sometimes. So long as we keep walking, I will be fine."

Despite the cold, the view was magnificent. Crabby old patches of ice
dazzled white in the early afternoon sun. Below, gray stone and
green-brown moss gave way to dwarf pines, sea-blue spruce, and braided
pines, their triple trunks twined together. A little melt-stream called
the Porcupine splashed foam-white through tiny rapids to fall into the
small, still pool made by an ancient dam. Below the dam, it tumbled down
the mountain once again to fall into space, a tiny echo of the rivers
that legend said fell into infinity over the side of the world.

"*Hai*---who's that down there?" Donaien pointed to the campground next to
the dam. Piaerre caught a glimpse of a two bent figures hurrying into
the trees, one with a heavy pack on his back, the other struggling to
shoulder his as he ran.

"*La*, is that not the tinker and his apprentice?" Razi asked.

Bosun Uyves scowled. "Aye. Probably spent the night here. He knows
that's not allowed."

Razi's eyebrows went up fractionally. "No?"

"Nope. Law says they can't settle anywhere on the mountain."

Razi's eyebrows climbed even further. "And camping overnight in such a
place is considered 'settling'?"

"Anywhere there's stonework," Donaien said, before the bosun could
reply. He spat off the side of the road. "That's the law, not that it
counts for much these days. There's a whole family of them own a house
now in Forecastle. Captain turns a blind eye, but---"

"What the captain sees and doesn't see isn't for you or me to have words
about," the bosun said sharply. "I'll gnaw on Vaszlav's ear the next
time he's in town. You want to make any more out of it, take it to the
Parledoux. Now, come on. I'm hungry."

As the travelers picked their way down to the campground the Hett had
just fled, Razi stopped a moment to adjust his sandal strap,
straightening up as Piaerre came by. "*La*, so, are you in the mood for
a lesson?" the bookster asked.

"Sure. I mean, yes, thank you, bookster."

"So, the tale begins with Yegor the First, who was king in Uws when your
people came to the mountain." The bookster pushed a branch out of his
way, his voice slipping into its familiar lecturing tone. "He gave the
Hett refuge, and appointed several to his council. His son, however---this
is Yegor the Second, also called Yegor the Sharp---he believed the Hett
knew the lost secrets of the Uncertain Angels, so when he came to the
throne, he demanded that they tell him. When they said they knew no more
than anyone else, he ordered them expelled. 'By evening three days
hence,' according to the official chronicle, 'They shall be outwith the
borders of our kingdom, taking no more than they brought.'"

"So what happened?" Piaerre asked.

The bookster sighed. "*La*, having been driven from their homes once
already, the Hett felt disinclined to obey. They put up barricades, and
fought with all the fury of people who have no more to lose. Which was
perhaps the Sharp's goal all along. The Sarkoszys were no longer as
secure upon their throne as they had been. He would not have been the
first king to find himself in need of an enemy. The Hett were already
unpopular---they were better smiths than the Uwsians, and many had grown
wealthy. Once the first stones were thrown, the rest would have been
easy."

He paused a moment, his eyes focused on the distance. "Those who fled
north into Ruuda were taken apart by the Pale Remainder. Those who went
south to Praczedt, *la*, wherever they went, they found Yegor the
Sharp's story of their 'secret knowledge' waiting for them."

"Sounds like you have a soft spot for the Hett." Laeuc's voice behind
them gave Piaerre a guilty jolt. How long had his father been listening?

Razi was unperturbed. "They are an interesting people. *La*, merely the
fact that they *are* a people, after five hundred years without a home,
makes them interesting."

"Well, best to keep that interest to yourself, at least in company."
Laeuc nodded at the campground ahead of them, where several dozen people
were already eating hard bread and dried fruit. Donaien, Armaend, and
the bosun had a fire going, and were talking in low voices as they
waited for their kettle to boil. "Most people don't feel as charitable
toward them as you do, and with everything else that's going on, it'd
probably be better to stick to verbs and such."

"Of course." Razi dipped his head. "I shall endeavor to be more
circumspect in future." Which was not, Piaerre noted, the same thing as
saying that he'd stop talking about it.

* * *

Piaerre's legs were aching by the time they crested the spur of rock
known as the Cripple's Shoulder to find Forecastle spread out below
them. He had been disappointed the first time he saw Avaunt's capitol,
just after his sixth naming day; it had seemed small compared to the
cities he had looked down on from his grandfather's verandah. But then
his father had led him down the last half-gallop of road, and the
realness of it had taken his breath away. It wasn't a picture in a book,
or a map, or a giant's toy on the ground a gallop below. It was a
prosperous, bustling town, and it was right there for him to explore.

Half of the Chernese spice trade, and most of its chocolate, traveled
north in Forecastle's warehouses; for four hundred years, iron, silver,
cider, and furs had gone south in return, making the Avauntois of
Forecastle very comfortable indeed. A few goats nipped at rooftop moss,
ignoring the smoke that rose from the chimneys around them, while
chickens cackled in wicker coops against the side of every second house,
but that was where the resemblance to Starboard Town ended. Starboard
Town's homes didn't have glass windows; its shops didn't have banners
strung proudly over their doors proclaiming the quality of the wares
within. And if Starboard Towners wore silk, it was just an accent laid
over plain cotton, not a whole shirt or a broad, brightly-colored
neatwaist.

The last half-gallop of the Forecastle Road wound through a pine tree
plantation. Thin smears of black smoke rose from charcoaling sheds by
the side of the road. A handful of arborists stripping bark off
recently-felled trees waved to the Starboard Towners. One, a young woman
with her hair pulled back in a thick club, set her root drill on the
ground and trotted over to say hello to the bosun. He waved his
companions on. "I'll catch up with you in town," he said, to knowing
grins from Laeuc and a few others.

The forest ended abruptly a few minutes later. Thirty strides away, on
the other side of the carefully-cleared firebreak, brick and timber
buildings stood shoulder to shoulder. Laeuc clapped his son on the
shoulder. "Come on," he said. "Let's go see what there is to see."

Narrow buildings lined cart-wide streets that turned back on themselves
like tangled yarn. Here, the afternoon sun turned a carp pond silver.
There, a vanity garden tumbled down a wall, rank upon rank of flowers
standing bright and proud in their troughs in defiance of the impending
drought.

The travelers dispersed the moment they entered Forecastle's winding
streets, some to visit family, others wanting to hurry straight to the
market or visit particular shops. They stopped and said hello to
everyone they knew. The Forecastlers they met seemed cheerful enough,
but the second thing out of their mouths was invariably, "No, we don't
know anything either." The third was usually, "Well, I should warn you,
you won't like the price." In the two and a half days since the mountain
had changed course, everyone in Forecastle had been buying all the
flour, smoked cheese, and dried fruit they could find. Candles, too, and
cheap cotton for bandages, and jars for storing water. Prices had gone
up like balloons.

"Damn groundlings started it," an old woman grumbled when Laeuc,
Piaerre, and the bookster stopped to look at the preserves she was
selling. Her expression was as dark as the blackberry stains on her
fingers. "Got all panicky. What's happening, where are we going, what if
the water runs out, on and on and on. Feh." She spat the gooey remains
of the cinnamon bark she'd been chewing into the bushes. "And of course,
the Hett got right onto it too. That Klaues fellow, he was in Market
Square a heartbeat after it happened, splashing silver around and
tossing what-not into his wheelbarrow while everyone else was still
picking themselves up."

"Didn't the captain do anything?" Laeuc asked.

She made a face. "Kind of like asking whether your fingers'll do
something about your thumb, isn't it? But you mark me---things keep going
on like this, the captain'll have to do something whether he wants to or
not."

Whether he wants to or not... The phrase went round and round in Piaerre's
mind. He wondered how many other people felt the same way the old woman
had. It had never occurred to him before that people would ever force
the captain to do something. The thought felt strange, like someone
else's shoes...

He nearly bumped into his father when Laeuc pulled up short outside a
glasswright's shop to greet a familiar balding man with a broad smile on
his face, a baby on his hip, and a bundle of cured brown bamboo under
his arm. "Regi! Clear day to you too. Bookster, this is my brother
Reginael, Piaerre's uncle. Regi, this is Bookster Razi, Piaerre's
master. And who's this? Oh, now, you can't be Annanette, can you? When
did you get to be so big, eh?"

Razi caught Piaerre's eye and smiled as Laeuc made faces at the
wide-eyed baby girl. Piaerre fidgeted from foot to foot until he could
take it no more. "Paere? Can we...?"

"Hm?" Laeuc said, distracted by the baby's wide-eyed wondering look. He
tousled his son's hair fondly. "I want to talk to Regi for a time. How
about you go ahead, and I'll meet you at the Green Pig at sundown? Do
you remember how to get to there? Are you sure? No, don't scowl, I'm
just asking."

"I'm not scowling." Piaerre said, scowling. He hitched his satchel up
higher on his shoulder. "Do you want me to get anything?"

"How about a new hair ribbon for QueÃ§enne? Your maere thought she'd want
one. No more than a quarter bezel, though."

Piaerre and Razi left Laeuc making faces at his chubby-cheeked niece.
The bookster seemed to be in no hurry to get to the bookstalls in the
market, and Piaerre was happy to stroll along beside him. Forecastle's
houses were no bigger than those in Starboard Town, but the paint on
them seemed brighter. Here and there, people had built rooms right over
the street, joining houses on opposite sides to create an arch. Drab
mountain swallows whistled at frustrated cats from round stick-and-mud
nests on the arches' undersides. Piaerre heard a snatch of Uwsian (at
least, he thought it was Uwsian) from two pale-skinned men arguing
amicably on a bench outside a chocolate seller's. A dozen strides
further on, an old woman with nimble fingers made a faceless marionette
dance and tumble, nodding solemn thanks every time a coin clinked into
the tray at her feet. So what if there weren't many kites in the sky as
there were over Starboard Town, or if the cobblestones needed weeding,
and some of the narrow alleys they passed smelled of damp and garbage?

And then there were the girls, girls whose names he didn't know, girls
who didn't know *him*, girls who didn't giggle and whisper in one
another's ears when they caught sight of him, but watched him out of the
corners of their eyes (or so he chose to imagine). Some were slender,
some were round; some had the chocolate skins and curly hair of the
south, others the copper complexion of the north. They carried buckets
to and fro, shooed cats away from birdcages, stitched new buttons on
door soldiers' uniforms, gossipped, swore, rolled dough in rough-ground
salt, or simply smiled, beautifully. It seemed that Forecastle had
something new to show him every time he turned the corner.

It certainly had a lot of corners to turn. Drumlurch Street led to Three
Bees Alley, which opened onto a third street whose name Piaerre had
never learned. It took them up a steep flight of stairs built against
the side of a warehouse, past a barber's, a loom mender's, and a
prosperous little Bantangui-style tea house where chili merchants
bought, sold, and speculated day and night when the mountain was
berthed.

As they rounded yet another corner, Razi said, "*La*, is that not the
bosun?"

Piaerre grinned. "I guess he has a lot of people to talk to." At that
particular moment, Uyves was talking to another young woman, one whose
almond eyes and long fingers showed that her family had more Bantangui
blood in it than the arborist he had been speaking to when they last saw
him. He nodded at something she said, touching her arm lightly in
farewell.

"Hoa!" He jumped slightly when he turned to find Razi and Piaerre
standing behind him. "Well, there you are," he said to Razi. "I was
wondering where everyone had gone."

"*La*, to market, I believe. That is why we came, is it not?" the
bookster replied drily.

Uyves grinned broadly. "Well then, lead on, lead on."

The market lay in the center of town, under the watchful gaze of a
sprawling, turreted building called the Hardeck. It was the tallest
building on Avaunt; the captain's clerks and mates had their offices on
its bottom two floors, while captain himself lived on the third, in a
suite of rooms that were supposed to be as richly decorated as the
king's own chambers in Ensworth. Gazing at the Hardeck's gray slate
roof, Piaerre wondered where the captain was at that very moment.
Standing in front of the famous window in the Grand Hall, his hands
clasped behind his back, watching the world roll by, a worried look on
his face? Or sitting at a desk somewhere, reading reports and writing
orders? *I wonder if he knows about Fraederiq?* Piaerre thought,
suddenly guilty that he hadn't thought it himself since the bosun began
telling the story of Vurt and the bonescuttle.

The market itself was as busy as a goat pen at shearing time. People
from Portside and Aft Landing jostled against strangers and second
cousins from Forecastle and Starboard Landing, all of them filling their
bags with anything that wouldn't spoil. "Five sequins for a jar of
plums!" Piaerre said to Razi, scandalized, when the bosun stopped to
clasp hands with someone Piaerre didn't know. "My maere would have a
dog!"

Razi shook his head. "*Masa il-kutna duttaqun as saa.* Have I taught you
that yet? It is Karabandi. It means, fill your water jars, a storm is
coming."

Piaerre looked at the faces around them. No one was smiling. Everyone's
voice had an edge---not the customary mock-scandalized market-day edge,
but something harsher. He suddenly remembered his papaere's stories
about the siege of Armaq. Vurt's teacher, a rogue named Ishad, had lived
through it. "Once the last of the cats were gone, people ate rats," Vurt
told his wide-eyed grandson one evening when Elaiene was safely out of
earshot. "And when the rats were gone, they ate each other, one mouthful
at a time..."

"You think there's going to be a storm?" the bosun asked, having heard
only the bookster's last few words.

"*La*, perhaps when we reach the mountains. If we have to go higher to
get over them, would we not---*teh!*" Without warning, Razi lunged forward
to catch a grimy collar.

"Ow!" A small figure struggled furiously, trying to slip out of the
oversized coat the bookster had caught. "Let go of me!"

"Oy, what's going on here?" the bosun asked.

"I didn't do anything! He just grabbed me! Stinking groundling! Let go!"
She was a head shorter than Piaerre, her curly dark hair hacked short
below her ears. Her grimy coat two was sizes too large for her, but her
waxed Bantangui sailing trousers left a handspan of bare copper-colored
ankle above her split-seamed shoes. She was too skinny to be pretty,
Piaerre thought, then immediately changed his mind.

Razi shook her, none too gently. "*La*, not until you give the nice
gentleman his wallet back, yes?"

The bosun patted his coat. "Hoy!"

The bookster pushed the girl in front of the bosun. "It is in her left
pocket."

Stony-faced, the bosun slapped the girl's hands out of the way and
pulled his brown leather wallet out of her coat. "That's not mine!" she
yelped. "He put it there! Stinking wormy---"

"Quiet!" the bosun bellowed, red-faced. People around them stared at the
scene, some grinning, some going *tsk, tsk* under their breath.

The girl subsided, glaring at the cobblestones. The bosun took her
collar from Razi. "Thank you, bookster. I'm sure the captain will want
to have a word with our little ragtagger. Ow! Stop that!" The bosun
tightened his grip as the girl kicked his shin.

Without warning, she bent almost double and pulled her arms free from
her jacket. As she darted away, Piaerre instinctively stuck out his
foot.

"Ooph!" Down she went. The bosun pounced on her. "Let go of me, you
sock-clutching bent-masted..." Her stream of curses set the people nearby
laughing.

From the look on the bosun's face, Piaerre thought steam was going to
start coming out of his ears. "Right," he said grimly, "If you want to
play the goat..." He pulled a twist of cord out of the tooled leather
pouch that hung from his belt and twisted the girl's arms behind her
back. "There? Happy now?" he asked as he tied her wrists together.

She glared at him, then at Razi, and then spat at Piaerre's feet.
Muttering under his breath, the bosun pushed her forward toward the
Hardeck. Razi and Piaerre followed behind.

"*La*, that was well done," Razi said approvingly.

"Thanks," Piaerre muttered. He ignored the bookster's quizzical look. If
he'd moved that quickly two days before, Fraederiq might still be alive...

Instead of marching his prisoner up the broad steps that led to the
Hardeck's front doors, the bosun half-dragged her to a smaller door that
stood in a shadowed recess at ground level. He yanked the cord hanging
by the door. A drum thubbed inside.

"Prisoner for charge," he told the uniformed guard who opened the door a
moment later, pushing the girl into the startled man's arms. Piaerre and
Razi followed them inside.

Piaerre had never realized that arresting someone involved so much
writing. Even Razi's patient smile eventually grew forced. "*La*, you
would think we were in Thind," he muttered as the clerk scribbled his
mark in yet another ledger.

"Sorry," the clerk said unapologetically, handing the ledger book to
Bosun Uyves to sign. "Procedures, you know. Must say, I'm glad we don't
have to go through this very often when we're in the air. At least, we
didn't until this one started showing up."

The bosun looked up. "You know her?"

The clerk sighed theatrically. "Oh yes. Better every week. I doubt
another night in the dungeon will scare any sense into her, but we'll
give it a try. Thank you. Now, can you initial here and here, please?"

Piaerre glanced at the girl. She was sitting on a stool in the corner of
the cold stone room with her hands still tied behind her back and her
coat on the floor beside her. He hadn't known the Hardeck *had* a
dungeon, but she didn't look as though she was scared by the thought of
spending a night in it. In fact, she looked as if she wanted to bite
someone's head off.

The clerk inked a round stamp and rolled it carefully across the bosun's
signature. "I think, yes, that should be everything. No, a moment,
there's---no, no, I was right the first time, that's all. Thank you,
bosun." He stood and nodded. "Now, you said you wanted to speak to the
captain? Yes? Good. He should be upstairs. You know the way?"

* * *

The captain was indeed upstairs---three flights of polished granite
stairs, to be exact. The brass handrail that ran beside them had been
worn shiny-smooth by generations of hands. Clerks in blue jackets
bustled past the trio from Starboard Town, squawking "shortage" and
"inventory" to one another like strange flightless birds.

Piaerre was so busy gawking at the tapestries on the walls, and the
statues frowning sternly between them, that he stumbled on every fifth
step. Most of the tapestries were brightly-painted silk from Ini Bantang
and Barra Bantang, though some had faded with age---great age, he
realized, gazing entranced at a bird's-eye view of what could only be
the sunken city of Plange. The statues that stood between them were made
of marble, bronze, and teak. Some were painted; others wore clothes cut
in styles Piaerre didn't recognize.

"Quite the sight, isn't it?" Bosun Uyves said proudly.

Piaerre nodded. "What's that one?" he asked, pointing.

The bosun shrugged cheerfully. "Not a clue. Bookster?"

Razi studied the tapestry. Glass windows stretched from head-height to
the ceiling at regular intervals, but even so, the building's interior
was growing dim as evening approached. "A parliament of whales, I
believe. Probably from Ruuda. Not bad work." He gestured at the one next
to it. "This, on the other hand, is Ossisswean. See here? The squares in
the corner? *La*, those are the painter's sign. Ossisswean portraitists
think it's bad luck to put their name on someone else's image, so they
mark their work after this fashion. Now, you notice the way the
subject's hands are clasped in front of his chest? In a formal portrait
such as this, that signifies---"

The bosun cleared his throat noisily. "Sorry, bookster, but you'd best
save the lesson for some other time. Wouldn't want to keep the captain
waiting."

Despite his own words, the bosun still paused for a few moments at the
top of the stairs to straighten his jacket and run a three-pronged brass
comb through his hair before thumping the little drum that hung beside
the door. "Enter," a deep voice said. The bosun opened the door and
waved the bookster and Piaerre through.

"Oh..." Piaerre gasped. They were in the famous Grand Hall. Its far wall
was a single enormous window. Below it, the Hardeck dropped vertically
to the steep cliff that formed the mountain's leading edge. The great
window curved slightly; if you stood close to its center and looked
straight ahead, you saw nothing except sky.

Paintings from all over Cherne covered the room's other walls. Delicate
yet indestructible ruins from the time of the Uncertain Angels, the sun
rising over a glacier in Anuvatik, tigers and courtiers in mirrored
masks listening to music on board a palace barge in Thind... If Piaerre
had looked more closely, he would have realized that none of them showed
Normous Berth, Mau Ngapcha, or anywhere else the mountain actually flew
over. Generations of captains had collected pictures of scenes they had
never thought to see out their front window.

"Good afternoon, bosun." Piaerre jumped. He hadn't noticed the two men
standing in the corner to his left.

The bosun saluted, nudging Piaerre with his elbow to do likewise. "Good
afternoon, *sra*."

The captain returned the salute sharply. He was stocky and
broad-shouldered, older than Piaerre's paere but younger than Papaere
Vurt. His wiry black hair was shot through with gray, and the wrinkles
at the corners of his eyes had been etched by the sun and endless,
patient argument.

The man beside him was taller and lighter, with blue-gray eyes and a
neat mustache. The lines on his face had been put there by a lifetime of
smiling. His high-collared knee-length jacket and trousers were simply
cut, but absorbed the light in a way that hinted at expensive fabric and
fine tailoring.

The captain gestured at the paintings around them. "I was just asking
Klaues what he thought the odds were that the next captain would have to
hang pictures of Normous Berth and Mau Ngapcha up there some day. Any
thoughts on that, bosun?"

"None, *sra*," Uyves said. "Afternoon, Klaues. Been arrested lately?"

The Hett smiled. "Six days a week, bosun, six days a week. And you? Any
chance you'll have time for another game of cards this trip? I wouldn't
mind a chance to get some of my sequins back."

"Plans made, I'm afraid," the bosun replied, sounding not the least bit
sorry.

The captain cleared his throat. "So, I understand you had some
excitement on the way here?"

"Just a little ragtagger, *sra*. The bookster snagged her, not me."

"Mm." The captain cocked an eyebrow at Razi. "Anything I should concern
myself with?"

The bookster turned his hands palms-up. "*La*, your clerk was pondering
a night in the dungeons. I think that, and scrubbing cobblestones, will
be sufficient."

The captain snorted. "Bucket full of good either's done in the past.
Anyway, I'm glad you've come---there's a few things I'd like to ask you.
If you'll follow me, I believe there may be chocolate. Bosun, you are of
course welcome to join us."

Bosun Uyves cleared his throat. "Thank you, *sra*, but with your
permission, I *do* have some other matters I'd like to look in on while
I'm here"

Piaerre saw Klaues stifle a smile as the captain said, "Of course. Go
finish your, um, rounds."

"Thank you, *sra*." The bosun saluted once again, spun on his heel, and
walked away, humming softly.

Razi and Piaerre followed the captain and Klaues through a side door to
a normal-sized room with normal-sized windows, a low Bantangui-style
table, and comfortable chairs. Very comfortable chairs, Piaerre thought,
sinking into one moments after the three adults. He climbed Slip Street
a dozen times every day, but even so, the long walk from Starboard Town
had worn him out. He wondered if there'd be time to visit Papaere Leau's
steam baths before dinner. *Probably not*, he thought regretfully.

There was chocolate, though. An old man in a spotless blue jacket poured
for them, then left. The captain and Klaues picked theirs up and blew on
them gently, but Razi ignored his, so Piaerre left his alone as well.

"So," the captain said. "Bookster. I don't suppose you've turned up
anything that might be of use?"

Razi spread his hands apologetically. "*La*, not so much as I had hoped.
I did find a description of a legend from Anuvatik, about a stone boat
that sailed to the moon and back. The author---she doesn't give her own
name, but from her writing, I would guess her to have been from
Leyselle---said that the boat made the journey several times before
disappearing. She concluded it was just a traveler's tale about Avaunt
that had grown garbled with time and distance."

The captain drummed his fingers on the arm of his chair. "Hm. This was
in our library?"

"Tucked away behind some very unremarkable poetry. To be honest, I
rather suspect she embroidered the tale somewhat. As I have been telling
my apprentice, just being written does not make a thing true."

"I wish more people shared your scepticism," Klaues said regretfully.
"Here. Have these shown up in Starboard Town yet?"

He took a sheet of cheap gray paper from his pocket and passed it to
Razi. Piaerre craned his neck to look. The printing on it was rough, and
had smeared slightly, but the message was plain. "The Committee of
Twenty-Nine," Razi read aloud. "Because there are twenty-nine of them?"

"Question twenty-nine from the last Parledoux," the captain grunted.
"About how many Hett should be allowed on the mountain."

"They've gone further this time," Klaues said quietly. "No Hett at all
save those born on Avaunt, to parents born here also."

Razi stroked his chin with his fingertips, as if combing a beard that
wasn't there. "Will they have the voices they need?" he asked, passing
the flyer back to Klaues.

The Hett shrugged. "Who can say? Four days ago, I would have said we had
left this behind us. Now? Two of my nephews have had stones thrown at
them in the streets. Somehow, people seem to think that what happened on
Orangeday is our doing." He laughed. "It apparently hasn't occurred to
them that if we have magic enough to move the mountain off its path,
throwing stones at us would be less than wise."

"Mm. Speaking of magic..." The captain steepled his hands under his chin.
"Do you know a magician from Ensworth named Thomas?"

Razi smiled broadly. "Of course! Do you also?"

"Not until this morning. He arrived just before dawn, in some damned
flying sailboat. Scared the roof goats half to death, and the militia,
too. Apparently Lady Marget---she's the King's Hand these days,
apparently---is worried enough about us changing course to send her chief
magician hawking after us under full sail."

"Her chief magician?" Razi laughed. "*La*, so is old Barramarrabee dead
then? And Roderick the Rhymer also?"

"*Her* chief magician, not the king's," the captain corrected. "He was
very careful to make that distinction. 'Not speaking on behalf of the
Throne and Collar', and so on. Anyway, he had a few things to say when I
mentioned you were here."

Razi nodded. "I imagine he would. We are not friends."

"I gathered that." The captain lifted his cup to his lips. "But from
what he tells me, you and Lady Kembe are."

Piaerre's breath caught. Lady Kembe was the most powerful magician in
the Karaband---some said in the whole of Cherne. There weren't just
stories about here, there were *legends*, and not all of them had happy
endings.

Razi met the captain's sharp eyes without flinching. "Am I accused of
anything?"

"Accused? No. But when you boarded the mountain in Mau Ngapcha, all you
told me was that you wanted to see what was in the Captain's House
library. There was no mention of you being Lady Kembe's fetch."

"I am no one's fetch." All of a sudden, Razi's voice could have struck
sparks off flint. "I have served her from time to time, as I would serve
anyone else who wanted old books found and read, but I am not, and never
have been, soul-ridden. If Thomas says otherwise, I call him a liar."

The silence that followed stretched as tight as Klaue's suddenly-frozen
smile. The captain finally broke it with a sigh. "Fair enough," he
grumbled. "But you could have said."

Razi spread his hands. "*La*, there is always much that could be said,
and is not. And much that is said, that---"

"All right, all right, don't go all philosophical on me." The captain
waved him into silence. "Mind telling me what it is between you and
him?"

"He tried to kill my previous apprentice," Razi said calmly. "It is not
the sort of thing one easily sets aside."

The captain looked at Piaerre as if the Starboard Towner was something
Razi had brought with him from the market. "I imagine not."

"Tell him about the picture," Klaues said.

"I'm getting there," the captain said testily. "Here---what do you make of
this?" He picked up the book that was lying on the table, opened it, and
passed it to the bookster.

Razi studied the page in front of him for a moment before tilting it so
that Piaerre could see. It was a tinted sketch of a small village in a
mountain valley. "Ruudian," the bookster said after a moment. "The work,
I mean, not the place. See the blues? And the way the trees are just
sticks on a green background?" Suddenly he laughed. "*La,* and of course
the artist has signed it, which helps. Larren Mehgasdottir... I don't know
the name, but from the style, I would guess it to be a hundred years
old, perhaps somewhat less."

"Mm hm." The captain sipped his chocolate. "Notice anything special
about it?"

Razi shook his head. Piaerre shook his as well, then hesitated. There
was something familiar about the scene... "It's just like the valley at
Normous Berth!" he blurted. "The big bowl the mountain sits in when
we're berthed!"

The captain nodded. "That's what I said. Thomas said some spell or other
pulled him to it. Caption's cut off, but it was called *The Mine at
Tinhead*."

"Which is where?" the bookster asked.

"In Praczedt. Upriver from Anyalcze. About a month away at our usual
speed, as the parrot flies, though at the rate we're going, we could be
there in..."

"Two and a half weeks," Klaues volunteered.

"Two and a half weeks. Don't suppose there's any mention of the place in
any of your books, is there?"

"*La*, they're actually your books," Razi corrected mildly. "And no, I
don't, but we will certainly look."

"Mm, you do that." The captain set his empty cup on the table. "But keep
it to yourself 'til we know whether there's anything to it. There's
enough rumors and what-not winging around right now."

"You have my name on it," Razi said, dipping his head slightly.

"Thank you." The captain glanced at Piaerre. "What about the boy? Think
he can keep it to himself?"

"Oh, *la*, you can trust him," the bookster said. "After all, if he
tells this secret, he won't get to hear any others. Is that not right,
apprentice?"

"Yes, *sra*."

"Hmph. Well, then." The captain stood and tugged his jacket straight.
"Thank you for your time."

Setting the book on the table and standing in turn, Razi bowed slightly.
"Thank you for your trust. I will do what I can to deserve it. But now,
can you perhaps tell me where Thomas is to be found? I should pay my
respects."

The captain's brow furrowed. "There'll be no blood shed on my mountain,
is that clear?"

Razi placed his right hand over his eyes. "May I be struck blind."

"Hm. He's probably upstairs with the birds. Said Lady Marget wanted him
to send word as soon as he arrived."

"*La*, then if I may excuse myself? Thank you. *Sra* Klaues, good
afternoon. Come, Piaerre. Let us say hello to our young magician."

* * *

Once, many years ago, a captain of Avaunt fell in love with a young man
from Aft Landing. She was twenty years his senior, but when he looked at
her, she felt like a girl again, and when they spoke, she felt as though
she was riding on a cloud. But one day, as the mountain lay berthed at
Mau Ngapcha, he disappeared. Some people say he was looking for glass
flowers to give her as a sign of his love. Others say he wanted to see
more of the world than what passed below Avaunt, or lacked the courage
to tell the captain that he had tired of her. Whatever the
reason---whether he was swallowed whole by a python, drained dry by
parasquitoes, or simply shaved off his mustache and changed his name---he
disappeared

In her grief, the captain locked herself away in the Hardeck's highest
room. Day after lonely day she sat there, neither eating nor sleeping,
until that part of her that could leave this world did.

The room stood empty after that---her nephew, who became captain in her
wake, feared that she might return as a ghost. Besides, his leg hurt
from a long-ago fall, and there were many stairs between the Hardeck's
front door and that room.

Some years later, a family of Gifted condors came to the mountain in
search of a new home. They were northerners, with gray feathers and
sharp eyes, who had lived peacefully (if not happily---condors are not
naturally cheerful creatures) in the Helada Mountains since time out of
mind. When the people of Ruuda finally overthrew their undead
oppressors, the condors decided that it was time to find a new place to
nest. Ruuda's new masters had no love for the Gifted; while raccoons
might think their minds could be changed, and bears might think they
could be fought, condors are no more optimistic than they are cheerful.
Without a backward glance or a goodbye, they spread their immense blunt
wings and left their troubles behind.

The captain was more than happy to give them the room: they could carry
messages to and from the surface, and even their ungifted progeny would
help keep the mountain's rabbits in check. He had the tower room's
window widened, and a screen put in to shelter the birds from the wind
and rain. Twice a week, on Redsday and Greensday, one of the Hardeck's
clerks swept the rabbit bones on the floor into a sack for burning,
refilled the birds' water jug, and scraped their droppings off their
roosting posts with an old wooden spatula and a wrinkled nose. New
clerks sometimes tried to chat with the room's residents, but Gifted
condors are hardly more talkative than their ungifted kin. No one ever
asked the birds whether the captain's ghost haunted the room, and for
their part, they never saw any reason to let people know.

"By my eyes, a dozen rabbits, hung 'til they're as ripe as cheese! Two
dozen! Just go!"

"Nawp." The first voice was human, heavily accented, and exasperated.
The second was an indifferent rasp. Razi smiled humorlessly and knocked
on the door.

"Yep?" the second voice squawked.

Razi pulled the door open and stepped into the room. Piaerre hesitated
on the tiny landing behind him for an instant, panting after the
bookster's near-sprint up the steep stairs. His mind was still whirling.
Razi worked for Lady Kembe? For *Lady Kembe*? He gulped and followed his
teacher into the condors' aerie.

"Ah, Razi! Hello, hello. So very to see you again. I've missed the sound
of your sandals behind me---they *are* the same ones, are they not? Well
made, I must say, to have lasted so long." The magician appeared to be
in his early twenties, with red-gold hair, blue eyes, freckles, and the
whitest smile Piaerre had ever seen. He wore a long black skirt and a
rich brocade jacket, black and dark green with red and gold thread
twisting through it. The pattern shifted slightly each time Piaerre
blinked.

Razi bowed deeply, fluttering his hands through an elaborate desert
greeting. "Thomas. Welcome to Avaunt."

"Thank you, thank you. You look well."

"As do you. This is my apprentice, Piaerre."

"Ah, Piaerre." Thomas beamed, as if he had been waiting eagerly to meet
some famous wonder-worker. "The pleasure, truly, the pleasure." He
folded his hands in front of his chest.

"Hello."

Thomas waited an instant. When Piaerre said nothing more, his smile
broadened. "A man of few words, eh? Like... Like... What was his name? The
boy from Medef? Eyeun?"

"Eimin," Razi corrected.

"Of course, of course, Eimin. Splendid fellow, very resourceful. How is
he these days, do you know?"

"Studious. Happy. Alive. And yourself?"

"Oh, alive as well, very much, and busy, busy, busy. Lady Marget is
wonderful, really. I am learning *so* much from her about the running of
things, and of course one is grateful for a chance to serve one's
fellows however one can."

"I'm sure one is," Razi repeated dryly.

Thomas raised a finger. "Now, now, that's two unpleasantries in a
row---let's not have a third, shall we? There are serious matters afoot
here. We can't afford to waste time bickering. Speaking of which..." He
turned back to the condor, who had neither blinked nor moved while the
humans spoke. "I believe we were discussing rabbits, were we not?"

"Nawp," the condor squawked. "You were."

"Tsk tsk," Thomas clucked. "I'm *sure* the captain would want my letter
to reach my Lady Marget without delay, so I implore you---"

"Nawp." The condor shook her head. She wasn't as ugly up close as
Piaerre had expected. Her beak was cruelly curved, and bald red skin on
her neck hung in loose wrinkles, but her eyes glittered like mid-winter
icicles, and the ruff of white feathers on her chest looked as warm as a
favorite sweater. "Won't. Might not get back. Might not know where back
was."

Thomas crossed his arms, tapping an impatient rhythm with his toe before
turning back to Razi and Piaerre. "By my eyes, they're as bad as the
waiters in Seyferte," he said lightly. "Do you have any suggestions?
Wait!" He snapped his fingers. "Perhaps you could ask Lady Kembe to pass
on a message on my behalf? She *is* so much better at this kind of thing
than I am."

Razi raised his palms in apology. "Perhaps the best thing would be if
you carried your message back to Ensworth yourself."

Thomas's smile hardened. Whatever riposte he would have made was
forestalled by wings rustling outside the window. A moment later, a
second condor settled on a perching post, then sidled into the room.
"Ehp," he squawked.

"Ehp," the first one replied.

"What do they want?" the newcomer asked.

"Message down to Ensworth."

The second condor rustled his feathers. "Nawp."

"Nawp," the first agreed. They swiveled their heads in unison to fix a
double stare on Thomas.

"Well, then," the magician said in mock-exasperation that wasn't really
mock at all, "I suppose I'll just have to find some other way to take
care of it. Thank you for your time." He turned back to Razi, still
smiling. "Razi---as always."

"And you." Razi raised his palms again.

"And good luck with your apprentice. I hope his education is easier than
his predecessor's was." Thomas caught himself. "Oh, but I forgot to ask.
Exactly which of your many trades does this one think he's studying?"

Razi raised his eyebrows at Piaerre. "I'm learning languages," Piaerre
said, feeling foolish. "I want to be a bookster some day."

"Ah, how worthy. I'm sure Lady Kembe will find that valuable."

"I'm not learning it for her." Even in his own ears, Piaerre sounded
defensive.

"Of course not," Thomas agreed warmly. "Well, clear day and good morrow
to you both." With a nod, Thomas stepped around Razi and left.

"Nasty," the second condor squawked after a moment.

Razi laughed. "*La*, yes, like ground glass in rice pudding." His
expression grew serious. "But truly, are you not flying any messages
today? Or was that just for the benefit of *sra* magician?"

"Nawp, no messages." The female condor's head bobbed from side to side
in an imitation of a human's headshake. "Mountain's moving too fast.
Might not be able to get back."

"I see," Razi said thoughtfully. "Well, if you change your mind---for
anyone---I'm sure the captain would be grateful if you let him know."

The condor tilted her head to study Razi, as if trying to decide whether
he was a rabbit or a tiger. "Ehp," she finally squawked, meaning 'yes'
or 'no', or 'silly mammal, I already knew that', or perhaps something
entirely bird-ish that Piaerre wouldn't have understood.

He followed Razi down four flights of stairs to the main floor, breaking
into a trot in places to keep up with the bookster's long-legged stride.
Gaggles of clerks and tabulators parted before them, bunching together
again in their wake like geese pecking at bread rinds tossed in a pond.

"Was his jacket magic?" Piaerre asked when the bookster finally slowed
down enough for conversation.

"I'm afraid so," the bookster said over his shoulder. "Have you ever
seen a spell before?"

"Sure, a couple of times. When Fraederiq---" Piaerre swallowed. "Fraederiq
broke his arm when we were little. We were playing dares on a swing
rope, trying to see who could get the highest, and he fell off. Gaeston
walked up here to get the captain's wife, and she came and did a spell
so that Fraederiq's arm would mend straight." He saw no reason to add
that Fraederiq's father had waited almost a week before sending for the
captain's wife. By the time she reached Starboard Town, his son had been
drenched in fever, and his arm had been mottled. That had been just a
few months after Fraederiq's mother had left; Fraederiq's arguments with
his father had started almost as soon as he was well enough to stand
once again. "And there was a rock slide a couple of years ago. It
blocked the Porcupine, so the captain hired a Bantangui to make the
rocks get up and dance themselves into a pile. He used one of my paere's
flutes for that."

The bookster slowed to his normal pace as they reached the front doors.
"Well, unless the world has turned upside down in the last ten years,
you're going to see some more magic done today. And *la*, there he is.
I'm surprised he doesn't hire a stage and a crier so that the whole town
can watch."

Thomas stood at the bottom of the broad steps that led down to the
market square. His brocade jacket hung in the air beside him, as if on
an invisible coat rack. The market-day crowd had already formed a circle
around him. They watched, hushing one another, as he folded a sheet of
creamy blue paper.

"What's he doing?" Piaerre whispered.

Razi rolled his eyes. "Performing," he said in a normal voice. "He lives
for it, truly. *La*, you see? He has made a bird."

Sure enough, Thomas had folded the piece of paper into a slender-necked
toy bird. Its graceful, angular form was small enough to nestle in the
palm of his hand. He raised it to his lips and blew on it gently. Its
tiny wings fluttered. He picked it up with his thumb and forefinger and
flicked it into the air.

The little paper bird flapped its wings, circling around his head like a
strange blue wasp. Someone shrieked. A few people applauded. Thomas
whistled sharply. The bird circled once more, then shot away westward.
"Show-off," Razi grunted.

Thomas raised his arms over his head and whistled again. His coat
flapped as if caught in a strong wind, up over his head, and settled
down neatly on his shoulders. Before Piaerre's astonished eyes, the
buttons did themselves up. Thomas smiled broadly as a few more people
applauded, then strolled toward the closest stall like a princess
inspecting her stables.

"Idiot." Razi shook his head. "*La*, Piaerre, truly, there is no one as
stupid as a clever man. Come---let us find your father." He gathered his
*deel* around him with one hand and stepped into the crowd.

Piaerre followed him through the end-of-day bustle of the market closing
up. Some vendors were disconsolately wrapping up the entire stock they
had brought that morning. Buckles and straps for climbing harnesses,
copper jewelry set with colored glass, embroidery thread---the worried
Avauntois had barely glanced at them. Those selling onions, sacks of
rice, cured peppers, palm oil, and rabbit traps, on the other hand, had
nothing to take home except jingling strings of coins. Some had raised
their prices five times before noon, and five times again before sunset.
"Scandalous!" people exclaimed, but they paid.

Razi, more practiced in moving through crowds than his apprentice, had
to stop every dozen strides to let Piaerre catch up. When they finally
reached the narrow streets on the market's other side, Razi glanced at
him. "So, the Green Pig? Do you know the way, or shall we ask someone
for directions?"

The question that had been swelling in Piaerre's mind spilled out of
him. "Bookster---did you know the mountain was going to change course?"

His teacher blinked. "By all the saints who laugh---whatever gave you that
idea?"

"I don't know." But Piaerre *did* know, and somehow the ache in his
muscles from day's long walk gave him the courage to say, "It just---it
seems like too much for coincidence. You coming here to, to find out
about the mountain's history, and, you know, what Thomas said." He
shrugged.

But Razi nodded. "*La*, you mean about my personal history? The fact
that I have worked for someone as famous for meddling in the world as
Lady Kembe?"

Piaerre nodded. "Yeah. And the other night, in the library, when you
said you were meditating. I heard you talking to someone, but there
wasn't anyone in the room."

"*La*, that." Razi sighed. "It had been a day for stories and secrets,
hasn't it? So, I will share one more with you, though I must ask you to
keep it to yourself. You don't have to," he continued, raising a hand to
forestall whatever Piaerre had been about to say. "If you decide the
captain really ought to know, then of course you will tell him. But..." He
lowered his hand. "It may be nothing---just a grain of sand in her shoe.
*La*, and if she had any name but her own, no one would pay it any
attention. I will therefore ask you to think carefully before repeating
what I tell you to anyone else."

He waited, a lean dark figure in desert brown, standing in the early
evening half-light on a narrow cobbled street a thousand gallops from
the city of his birth, while his apprentice wrestled with his
conscience. Finally Piaerre nodded. "All right."

"Thank you. Lady Kembe has dreams sometimes, dreams that are more than
dreams. And in those dreams, these last few years, she has seen things.
People falling from a great height, a shadow moving across the land... It
could mean nothing. It usually has, in the past---divination is a chancy
thing. But still, better to search and not find than not to search.
Since she cannot come here herself..." He turned his palms up. "Here I
am."

Piaerre scowled. "So the captain was right. You *are* her fetch."

Razi's hand was suddenly on Piaerre's collar. "I will say it again," he
told his apprentice calmly, his grip as strong as it had been on the
little thief's two hours before. "I am nobody's fetch, and never have
been. Lady Kembe has done this world greater service than it knows---*la*,
greater than it deserves, I sometimes think---but if she was of the kind
who use their power to bend men's wills, I would write her name on the
wall just so that I could piss on it. I do this for her because I trust
her. If she is afraid, then I am afraid. And if a smiling tapeworm like
Thomas is crawling around as well, then I am doubly afraid, because
where she would act to keep the world in balance, he would look only to
see what advantage he might find." He let go of Piaerre's collar and
smoothed it down. "Now, let us find your father. Half the mountain is
here today, and if we do not claim beds for ourselves soon, *la*, we
will have to perch upstairs with the birds."

* * *

Like people everywhere, the Avauntois preferred the company of their own
kind. Starboard Towners tended to stay at the Green Pig when in
Forecastle, or in one of the two smaller inns next door known as the
Piglets. If you were from Portside, you probably closed your eyes in the
Tattered Flag, which took its name from a song that had been popular in
Normous Berth a generation ago; if you'd walked all the way from Aft
Landing, Im Awre's nameless Bantangui-style hostel on Flat Saddle Street
was your favorite port of call. If you were poor, you scrubbed dishes in
the militia's ordinary room so that you could sleep on its floor. And if
you were Hett, you found what shelter you could half a gallop out of
town, next to the tipping grounds where sawdust from the mountain's
single sawmill was mulched with the contents of Forecastle's nightsoil
jars before being spread on the town's vegetable gardens.

The Starboard Towners were doubled up, six in rooms meant for three, on
the Green Pig's upper floor. At dinner, they talked over soup and sweet
potato bread with Forecastlers who preferred eating out to cooking in.
Who had they seen? What had they bought, and for how much? *How* much?
Oh, that was a crime. "Though you can't fault folk," a severe-looking
woman said. "If they weren't selling for twice what they ought, they'd
never to be able to afford anyone else's prices, would they?"

Heads nodded. Salt, someone else said. It had been hard to find salt,
and what could be found was three times its usual price. Someone else
mentioned boot leather. "And tea," said a third. "I couldn't find tea
anywhere."

"Try the Hett house," another Forecastler said. He had been silent until
then, with his head bent over a wooden bowl of stew, and a thick gray
Darpani-style ponytail hanging over the back of his chair. "That Klaues
fellow was the first one down the market when it happened. Bet he's got
tea. *And* salt."

Donaien snorted. "Let him have it. You can live without tea, if you have
to."

"Just like soap, eh?" one of the Starboard Towners jibed. A few people
laughed.

Donaien flushed. Armaend put a hand on his shoulder. "Nothing special
about tea," Armaend said calmly. "Why, my papaere used to boil burned
bread with sugar instead. Swore the leafy stuff never tasted half as
rich. Of course, if the water runs out..."

Before anyone could answer that, there was a sharp rapping on the window
shutter. "Can you get that, please?" the innkeeper's harried daughter
called. A Forecastler untied the latch string and pushed the shutter
open.

"Much obliged," squawked Jack the parrot, hopping from the window sill
onto the table. He shook himself with a quick rustle of feathers,
preening one wing with quick strokes of his blunt beak as various people
said hello.

"Hoy!" A man at the next table beckoned to the innkeeper. "Some crackers
for our friend here!"

The room went quiet, so quiet that Piaerre could hear the innkeeper's
daughter complaining in the kitchen about the looks that one of the
customers had been giving her. The silence stretched out until the man
who had spoken mumbled, "Sorry. Just making a joke."

"Well, nobody's laughing," someone muttered.

Jack rustled his feathers again. " So," he squawked brightly, "Who's
buying the first round?"

Piaerre sat silently between his father and Razi as tiny glasses of
steaming cider arrived, lost in his own thoughts, until he heard his
name. "Pardon?" he asked.

"I said, I heard you met the captain today," Jack said. "In the
Hardeck."

Piaerre nodded. "And Klaues, and a magician named Thomas who's come up
from Ensworth."

"Awwrk! Figures he'd be there."

"Who, the magician?" Donaien asked.

"No, the Hett. Never has his mouth more than your little finger from the
captain's ear."

Piaerre hesitated. "He said he'd been arrested."

A few people laughed. Puzzled, Piaerre looked at his father. "They
arrest him every day," Laeuc said gently. "Because of his house."

As the innkeeper and his daughter wrestled an iron pot full of bread
pudding in orange peel sauce onto the table for dessert, Laeuc explained
the joke, doubling back every half sentence as someone corrected him or
added more details. Hett weren't allowed to stay in town overnight, so
Klaues' grandfather, who had been the first Hett on Avaunt to have any
real money, had built his house just a few steps past the boundary stone
that marked the official edge of Forecastle. A few years later, an old
map had surfaced (or been forged---it depended who you asked) that put the
boundary sixty strides further out. Rather than toss the Hett out, the
captain of the time had reached an understanding with them. Every
morning, at dawn, a bosun's mate knocked on the front door of the house
and announced that he was arresting every Hett inside. And every
morning, Klaues answered with a string of coins to pay the fine.

"Of course, being Hett, they found a way to play it to their own end,"
Jack finished. "There's half a dozen houses there now, all roofed
together so they can claim it's just one."

"But they still all have to pay the fine every day," Laeuc countered.

"So?" Jack pecked a piece of orange peel off the plate that Donaien had
put in front of him. "Still shouldn't be allowed. I don't mind Vaszlav
and the like---they know their station---but these new Hett...they're shifty."
He scratched the side of his head with a claw. "Like cats."

"Well then, here's to Question 29!" The ponytailed Forecastler raised
his glass. Everyone else reached for theirs, saying, "Question 29," with
varying degrees of enthusiasm---everyone except Razi, who smiled slightly
but said nothing.

Conversation rambled after that. When the innkeeper and his daughter
came to clear the table, Razi wrapped his *deel* around his long legs
and retired to a bench against the common room wall with a book. Piaerre
followed his father and the other men upstairs to their room.

The sliver of cheap orange dayglass the innkeeper had given them threw
distorted shadows on the walls as they took off their boots, coats, and
overshirts, wrapped themselves in whatever blankets they had brought,
and fell asleep, two on the bed, three on the floor, and Piaerre in the
corner, legs stretched out, head pillowed on a roll of blue goat's wool
Laeuc had bought for Gaeston. He fell asleep wondering how many others
would have picked up something extra for Fraederiq's father as well.
*Most*, he bet himself sleepily. Gaeston wasn't popular, but that didn't
matter. He was their neighbor, and some things you did whether you liked
the person or not.

He drifted into sleep, and then into dreams. Fraederiq was so small that
Piaerre could have picked him up with one hand, except he was hiding
among the pink bougainvilleas blooming in the Captain's House garden.
Piaerre tried to catch him with the blue blanket he held in his
outstretched arms, but Fraederiq was too fast. He bolted through
Piaerre's legs like a rabbit and ran downhill.

Piaerre shivered in his sleep. He mustn't let the rabbit go that way.
Something bad was lurking behind Mamaere Mayeule's. All of a sudden he
was there, leaning over the waist-high stone wall, reaching desperately
for the mottled brown rabbit, but he overbalanced and fell into nothing,
arms and legs flailing.

"Hsst! Wake up!" Piaerre grabbed the hand clamped over his mouth and
opened his eyes. The moonlight coming through the slats on the shuttered
window painted silver stripes on his father's unbuttoned shirt and
concerned face.

Piaerre slumped back onto his mattress. His father took his hand away.
"Bad dreams?"

Piaerre nodded again, too disoriented to trust himself to speak.

"Laeuc? Whazzit?"

"Nothing, Donaien. Just going to the necessary." He studied his son.
"You all right?"

"I'm fine." Piaerre punched the roll of wool to bunch it up and laid his
head on it once again.

"Should have brought your night light," his father said.

Piaerre shook his head. Laeuc patted his son's shoulder awkwardly,
thinking about a little boy who used to throw himself into his father's
arms every night for a kiss before bed. "Right. Get some sleep. We have
the walk back tomorrow."

* * *

Bluesday, Peridot 15^th^. In a normal week, it would have been market
day in Forecastle, but none of the Starboard Towners saw any point
staying for it. Everyone who had something to sell had been there
yesterday; everything worth buying had been bought.

They left town just after dawn, with tea and extra helpings of the Green
Pig's famous flatbread in their bellies. No one spoke. More than salt or
new shoes, they had gone to Forecastle seeking comfort. Instead, they
had found the same fear that had driven them there. "He'll tell us what
he knows when he knows something," the bosun said curtly when someone
asked about his meeting with the captain.

Piaerre kept his thoughts to himself. In the long hour it had taken him
to get back to sleep, he had debated the rights and wrongs of keeping
what Razi had told him from his parents, his papaere, the bosun, and
everyone else on Avaunt. Half of him wanted to blurt it out, but Razi's
calm trust held him back. *Wait and see*, he finally decided. *Wait and
see*.

As they trudged into Starboard Town that afternoon, the people working
in the fields hurried to meet them. Did they know anything? Did the
captain? Where was the mountain going? What was going to happen? No, no,
we don't know, and we don't weeping know, were the bosun's answers.
Those who had made the trek went home to unpack their purchases and soak
their feet. Those who had stayed behind went back to their fields. The
same dull foreboding weighed on them all.

In the week that followed, people ate and slept, hoed beans, mended
drawers that had started to stick, and darned socks, just as they always
had. But every day, mothers and daughters went into the woods above and
aft of town with satchels over their shoulders, looking for mushrooms
and out-of-season berries to dry or preserve, while fathers and sons
stalked rabbits and edible birds with slingshots and crossbows. And
almost everyone found some excuse or other to visit Papaere Vurt's.

Piaerre went there the day after returning from Forecastle to tell his
grandfather about meeting the captain, and about Thomas's magic paper
bird. He was astonished to find a dozen people standing at the verandah
railing, passing a plate of over-dry biscuits around. For a moment he
wondered whether Mamaere Mayeule had finally proposed, but then he
realized they had come down for the view. The world rolling by below was
not the world they and their parents had seen year after year. Savannah
had given way to forest, broken here and there by jumbled blocks of
stone, each a hundred strides on a side, that showed where one of the
Uncertain Angels' great castles had collapsed in their long-ago war.

In front of them, the Brumosos were half again as high as they were used
to seeing them, and growing taller by the day. Their snow-capped peaks
gleamed like polished teeth; here and there, horsetails of blown snow
wisped and curled like the chimney smoke of giants. Another week, seven
days at the most, and Avaunt would be among them.

Piaerre's grandfather spotted him. "Morning, lad." He waved him closer.
"Come have an eyes-open."

Below, two small lakes shone silver-blue amid green spring fields. A
tiny village stood between them, just twenty houses and a mill, but
twenty houses and a mill that had never seen the mountain before.

Someone handed Piaerre the biscuits. As he passed it on without taking
one---he'd had his papaere's biscuits before---Avaunt's irregular shadow
crept closer to the settlement below. "There they go," someone said as
an ox-drawn cart pulled away from the little mill. With a shock, Piaerre
realized that they were fleeing the oncoming mountain. He imagined the
cart piled high with elderly relatives, prized items of furniture, sacks
of potatoes and jars of preserves. He could almost hear the voices
urging the oxen on, "Hayyup! Hyah!" *They must be terrified,* he
thought. He would be.

He sorted and shelved books with a renewed sense of urgency after that,
trying to match Razi's punishing pace. By the time Bluesdsay came around
again, the bookster's eyes were bloodshot, and the skin below them
weary-dark.

Upon hearing that he hadn't had dinner at Mamaere Mayeule's the previous
two evenings, Elaiene gave Piaerre a crock of squash and onions stewed
with raisins, with strict orders to see that his teacher ate it all.

"But that's baby food!" Piaerre protested.

"It'll be good for him," his mother declared. "And ask him if he's warm
enough at night. I have one of your papaere's old sweaters he could
borrow if he isn't."

Laeuc looked up from the table, where he was carving a smoke-and-leaves
pattern into a bamboo flute, and rolled his eyes. On the other side of
the table, QueÃ§enne just scowled. Laeuc's smile slipped. His daughter
had thanked him for the new hair ribbon, but hadn't worn it. Each time
she and Chaentelle took Chaentelle's slow-witted half-brother Matthieu
out for a walk, they always wound up at the funeral garden.

Piaerre arrived at the library to find Razi asleep with his head
pillowed on his arms. "Bookster? Bookster?" Piaerre shook the Karabandi
gently.

"Mm? *La*, good morning, Piaerre." Razi wiped the sleep from his eyes
and yawned enormously. "It is morning, is it not?"

"Yes, bookster." Piaerre set the freshly-charged brick of dayglass he'd
brought in from outside on the table. The bookster blinked and looked
away from its bright, cool glow. When Piaerre took the brick that had
lit the room through the night from the lamp, Razi picked it up and
turned it over in his hands.

"Did I tell you, ever, that I worked for a time in a glass mine? In
Ossisswe?"

"No, bookster." Piaerre closed the lantern's cover---no sense using the
light when plenty was pouring in through the window.

"It is quite the thing to see. Underground, it looks like this, just
dull glass. The first time you take a piece into the light, *la*,
sometimes it does nothing. Sometimes it just sparkles for a moment, and
sometimes... Sometimes what you have found is one of those pieces that
purifies light instead of just storing it, so that when it shines, it
casts no shadows. It was good preparation."

"Bookster?"

"For being a scholar. Here, look." He opened a cloth-bound book whose
pages were stitched together with heavy gray thread and pushed it across
for Piaerre to read.

"It's a tax roll from Anyalcze," Razi explained. "See? Every year, *la*,
there is another line or two for every village the agent visited. And
look here." He tapped the page. "Tinhead."

The handwriting on the page was a clerk's economical, professional
script. "Found vacant upon arrival," Piaerre translated slowly. "Is that
right?"

"Very good. And here. And here, too." He smiled tiredly. "It would seem
that the good townsfolk of Tinhead are allergic to tax agents."

Piaerre turned the page, then flipped back. "Where did you find it?"

The bookster didn't look up. "*La*, and look here. This would be thirty
years ago. No, thirty-one, I forget myself. Read it."

"Troop... Troop sent to en---"

"Enforce."

"To enforce collection. Heavy..."

"Casualties."

"Casualties resulting from... I don't know that word."

"Avalanche. A rock slide, not snow." Razi tapped the page, obviously
excited despite his weariness. "The duke, *la*, it would be Czepel of
Anyalcze, I think, he held that part of Praczedt at the time, he must
have decided it was time to collect what he was owed. Or perhaps he
wanted to remind his neighbors that his law ran that far into the
mountains."

Piaerre frowned. "A lot of them must have died."

Razi's eyebrows went up. "Because?"

Piaerre turned the page again to the following year's entry. "Found
vacant upon arrival," he read aloud. "The same as before. Whatever
really happened was bad enough that the duke didn't try again."

A slow smile spread across Razi's face. "*La*, well done," he said
approvingly. He tapped the page again. "So, today we widen our search.
Everything about Anyalcze onto the table. We'll worry about sorting it
later."

Memoirs and travelers' guides, legal commentaries, lists of ingredients
for spells as pointless as they were obscure, advice for traders... The
bookster and his apprentice waded through them one at a time, looking
for any mention of Anyalcze or Duke Czepel. As volume after volume came
off its shelf, was scanned, and then replaced, Piaerre wondered how a
thirty-year-old tax roll containing no mention of Avaunt had come to be
in the Captain's House library. He didn't think it had been there the
week before...

They worked all day, but to no avail. Like everywhere else in Praczedt,
the port of Anyalcze had been inherited, fought over, and traded between
noble families for centuries. At twenty-two years, Duke Czepel's reign
had lasted twice as long as anyone else's in the last century. He had
built a hospital for distressed mariners (a receipt for chocolate and
pepper bought directly by his agent for the inaugural banquet, dated and
counter-signed by the captain's chief tabulator), married his cousin (a
traveler's diary that also included a description of a failed attempt by
some Bantangui pirates to raid Forecastle's warehouses while the
mountain was at its southern berth), and promoted the use of Ruudian
trade law in place of the jumble of Uwsian, Thindi, and local custom
used in most of Praczedt (a jurist's annotations on a disputed contract
brought before the captain in Normous Berth). But there was no direct
mention of Avaunt, and none at all of Tinhead.

Piaerre almost had to drag his protesting teacher down the hill to
Mamaere Mayeule's for dinner. He ate his own in depressed near-silence,
and was asleep minutes after slipping under his quilt. The nightmare
that woke him seemed as much a part of his routine as scouring his teeth
or stacking firewood beneath the kitchen window.

The next day passed as the day before it had, and the next, and the one
after that. Avaunt flew north and east toward the mountains. Each day,
Piaerre recited lists of Praczny verbs under his breath as he dressed,
and made up child-like sentences about the things around him on his walk
up the hill. "The cat of the grandmother is white and orange." "Is the
door of the---of the---hm. Is the door of the house of Mayeule open?" He
made a note to find out what the Praczny word for 'inn' was, only to
discover that there were five, depending on its size, its quality, and
whether or not it had a stable.

He made up another sentence, too: "I think you broke my jaw."

No one had grumbled when Bosun Uyves announced that militia drills would
be held twice a week. Many people actually seemed relieved to finally be
doing something. The bandits who occasionally tried to raid the mountain
while it was berthed at one or the other end of its journey had never
bothered with Starboard Town, but its people still trained to defend
their homes, just like their cousins in Forecastle. The able-bodied men
gathered in the goat-shearing yard, half with spears, the other half
with bows, while boys bruised each other with sticks in imitation
drills, and the elderly grumbled encouragement from the sidelines.

After settling in Starboard Town, Vurt had quickly become the town's
unofficial militia master. The bosun of the day didn't mind---he'd always
felt foolish shouting orders at people he'd known since birth---and
neither his successor nor Uyves had seen any reason to unyoke an ox that
pulled its cart so willingly. Every Orangeday afternoon, he took his
place on the stump beside the yard to call the drill and pounded the
assembly drum until the townsmen formed up. "Right," he said with
relish, some part of him back in the practice yards of his youth, "Let's
have at it. And *lunge*, and *back*, and *block*, and *back*. Come on,
Marq, point up. Now *down*, and *lunge*, and *up*, and *forward*..."

That Orangeday, when Piaerre heard his papaere's bellowing through the
library window, he looked at the three Bantangui fan-books he was
supposed to be refolding and sighed heavily. Razi raised his eyebrows.
"Do you think they'll be any use?" Piaerre asked.

The bookster glanced at the books. "*La*, how would I know? Set them
aside---I'll look at them later."

"No, I mean what they're doing outside. If something bad happens, do you
think they'll be any use?"

The bookster sucked in his cheeks. "*La*, I don't know. I have never
watched them." He stretched. A joint popped. He winced and rubbed his
shoulder. "Perhaps a walk would do us both some good."

Piaerre followed his teacher out of the library into the fresh air, then
along Cross Street to the shearing yard. As usual, the militia was
divided into two squads. Papaere Vurt and the bosun occasionally gave
them names, or had them wear scarves of different colors, but everyone
persisted in calling them "this squad" and "that squad". This squad
attacked while that squad held its ground, then that squad regrouped and
counter-attacked while this one retreated, one practiced step after
another.

"And down. All right, you rabbits, how many of you *didn't* have an
arrow notched? Eh? Come on, Naeville, Edouard, I saw you. Ah, bookster."
Papaere Vurt nodded a greeting. "What do you think?"

The bookster ran a hand over his clean-shaven scalp. "*La*, I have only
seen a little. Perhaps you could continue?"

"Of course." Vurt turned back to the sweating men and raised his cane.
"All right, and...*lunge*! And *back*! And *parry*! And *back*!"

Razi gathered his *deel* with one hand and swung himself up to sit on a
fence post. Piaerre climbed up beside him, just as he had climbed up
beside his sister when they were little.

Together, they watched the men go through their drills. Those with
spears lunged in unison, then dropped to one knee to let the archers
fire. As their partners shouted, "Twang!" and pretended to string
another arrow, the spearmen stood, blocked, and moved the line forward a
stride.

Everyone was sweating by the time that squad halted with their backs
against the post and brush fence. "So, what do you think?" Papaere Vurt
asked again.

Razi raised his palms. "*La*, they do that very well. Almost like a
dance, yes? But do you practice closing ranks when someone falls? I have
seen soldiers do that. Someone calls a name, and that one falls as if
his arrow had found him. Everyone else pushes together, shoulder to
shoulder, to keep the rank tight, like this." Razi held up his hand with
his fingers spread, then brought them together.

Papaere Vurt nodded thoughtfully. "Good idea. Thank you, bookster. All
right, everybody, let's do it again! Only this time, when I call your
name..."

"They aren't much, are they?" Piaerre asked Razi quietly.

The bookster shrugged. "Against bandits at Mau Ngapcha? *La*, for that
they are fine. Against a squad of the Ossisswe Guard, or handful of
Unnamed from Thind? They would be bone meal." He hopped lightly off the
fence. "But come, enough. We have our own---"

*Crack!* Someone yelped a curse. Razi and Piaerre whirled around to see
the bosun helping Marq to his feet. "You all right?" he asked.

Marq shook his head. His chin was red when he took his hand away from
his mouth. He spat out a bloody tooth. "I think you broke my jaw," he
mumbled.

"Here, let me see that." Uyves reached for Marq's face.

The other man slapped his hand away. "Goin' t' see Mayeule," he mumbled.
He stalked off, leaving his spear on the ground where it had fallen.

* * *

On Bluesday, Peridot 28^th^, the people of Avaunt woke to find
themselves surrounded by mountains. They were no longer flying toward
the Brumosos; they were in them.

Razi spread a hand-sketched map on the table in the Captain's House for
the bosun to see. "The RejtÃ©ly Pass," he announced, tapping a hash-edged
gap in the mountains. "Some Darpani tribes graze their herds there in
the summer, *la*, and drive cattle through to the coast, but not often.
The book I found said it was a hard trail."

"You think the mountain can make it through?"

The bookster turned his hands palms-up. "I cannot say."

So people hoed their carefully-manured fields as they always had,
pulling weeds from the neat rows and replacing the bamboo slats the
beans would climb as they grew. A few watered their vanity gardens
surreptitiously, until Bosun Uyves strolled down Slip Street one morning
making loud comments about how green they were in comparison to those of
honest, law-abiding folk. At dinner that evening, when Laeuc said that
he could see why people would want to keep their gardens up, Papaere
Vurt almost exploded.

"Why? Wherever we're headed, it isn't the orchid market in Normous
Berth." He glowered at his son-by-marriage, annoyed once again by the
way Laeuc always found a way to see the other person's point of view.

"Well, no, probably not, but everyone's so on edge, I think letting them
keep to routine would---"

"Cake," Vurt interrupted flatly.

"Paere!" Elaiene exclaimed, affronted. "Not in front of the---"

"They've heard worse." He waved her objections away impatiently.

"Not in this house they haven't," his daughter declared heatedly. No
one, not even her father, dared remind her of what she had said when she
sliced the tip of her thumb while skinning a rabbit the day before.

"Well then maybe I ought to be in a different house." Vurt pushed his
stool back and heaved himself upright, his cane clattering angrily in
his hand.

He sat down again eventually, of course---he always did---but scenes like
that were being played out up and down Slip Street that evening. People
didn't like going days without a bath. They didn't like watching their
flowerbeds wilt, and they especially didn't like the way the wind
sounded. It was different. It was *wrong*. It crept into Piaerre's
dreams, rushing past his ears as he fell, arms and legs windmilling
slowly, down and down until the mountain's belly was a dark emptiness in
the bright blue sky above him and he woke, drenched with sweat.

That morning, Vaszlav had arrived in the morning without Jaromir. "He is
gone over to Portside instead," he explained apologetically to the bosun
as he set up his stall. "He is thinking, people are not so much buying
now, so perhaps we are better to try apart than together."

His diffident smile melted against the bosun's frown. "Don't recall
anything in his license papers about him being allowed to wander around
on his own."

Vaszlav shrugged helplessly. "They do not say he cannot."

"Well, as far as I'm concerned, he's only welcome here if he's with you.
Understood?"

"Yes, bosun."

Relenting suddenly, Uyves said, "Oh, don't look like that. It's for his
own safety. You don't want any trouble, do you?"

"No, bosun." They both knew what kind of trouble Uyves meant. Jack had
brought word that the shutters on the Hett house in Forecastle had been
broken by thrown stones a few days before. A handful of toughs had
jostled the Hett the next morning when they tried to buy slats in the
market to make repairs. Forecastle's bosun had sent them on their way,
but the mood was still ugly. It was the wind, everyone said. It just
felt wrong.

Vaszlav left that afternoon without having sold a single thing.
Purplesday came and went. It was supposed to be the day of rest, but no
one could. Piaerre and Razi catalogued a century and a half's worth of
arrest records. His father ruined a flute he had been working on for
most of the week. Gaeston stood in his doorway, raising his bottle
sardonically to everyone who met his eye, while Mamaere Mayeule snapped
at Matthieu for dropping a pan of roast rabbit on the floor, instantly
hating herself when the big-boned, slow-witted boy burst into tears. All
around, the Brumosos marched past, gray stone under a dark carpet of
forest, crowned with snowcaps as white as a tiger's fangs.

Piaerre was sitting at the top of the stairs that led down to his
grandfather's cottage, watching the unfamiliar peaks and hating himself,
when Niquolas said, "Hoy," behind him hesitantly. Piaerre grunted
without lifting his chin off his knees.

"Whatcha doing?" Niquolas asked.

"Thinking,"

"Oh." There was a pause while Niquolas digested that. "What about?"

Piaerre shrugged, then sighed (just loud enough to be heard) when
Niquolas sat down beside him.

"You ever wonder what it's like down there?" the older boy asked. When
Piaerre didn't answer, Niquolas continued, "All those cities we never
see---I bet they don't all look after goats 'n' pull up weeds."

"Bet they do." Piaerre wiped his nose on the knee of his trousers.
"Someone has to."

"Doesn't mean it has to be us. Me and Fraedi... Here, look." He pulled
something dark and hairy out of his shoulder bag and held it out.

Piaerre looked at it sidelong, but made no move to take it. A little
larger than his two fists put together, covered in coarse, dark fibers,
with cut-out diamonds for eyes and a ragged grin full of carved fangs...
"What the cake is that?"

"It's a head," Niquolas said proudly. "For a door soldier. C'mon, you
remember---I was going to trade some of 'em to the Hett for that thing
Fraedi wanted."

"Oh. Right."

"We got the coconuts out of the trash after Departure Eve, and we've
been carving them all different ways. Well, mostly I've been carving,
but a lot of the ideas were Fraedi's. He figured we could get half a
ring each for them in Normous, on account of them being novelty items.
Maybe more, if we had time to make some helmets for them or something."

"Mm." Piaerre turned back to the mountains.

After a moment's hesitation, Niquolas put the coconut head back in his
bag. "Now that he's... Well, I was wondering if..."

Piaerre stood up abruptly. "I have to get up to the library," he said.
"The bookster will be expecting me."

Niquolas scrambled to his feet. "Right." He raised a hand in a half-wave
to Piaerre's back. "Suppose that's more important."

As Piaerre reached the first bend in the path, he glanced back. Niquolas
was still standing at the top of the stairs, staring at the peaks below.
Suddenly remorseful, Piaerre opened his mouth to call out. As he did so,
Niquolas pulled the carved coconut from his bag and threw it off the
mountain.

That was Purplesday, the day of rest. Then Redsday came around again,
the last day of Peridot, and Avaunt began to descend.

Papaere Vurt was the first to notice. He came panting up Slip Street not
long after sunrise. "Horizon's higher than it was," he told the bosun.
"Put a notch in a railing post last night before I turned in. Must be
two hands down from where it was."

Word spread like a touchfire along dry branches. They were descending.
The mountain was going to crash into the mountains after all, or drown
them all in the sea.

"Enough!" the bosun bellowed at the crowd outside the Captain's House.
"We don't know anything more than we did yesterday, except that we're a
bit lower than we were. That's all. Could mean nothing more than
changing direction did."

"Well, *that's* a comfort," Gaeston said loudly. A few people murmured
agreement. He had emerged from his house sober, with the scruffy
beginnings of a beard and a restless anger that was all too obviously
looking for something to burn down. Beside him, Marq nodded vigorously,
his jaw still swollen purple.

The bosun glared at Gaeston. "If you have any ideas, now's the time to
share them."

"What about that magician the captain summoned? The one with the boat.
He must know something. Or be up to something. Why else would he have
come here?"

"Well, if it was to get away from fools, he'll have been sorely
disappointed," Papaere Vurt muttered loudly.

"And that's no help either," the bosun snapped, angry at his own
helplessness. "Just... Just get on with things, all of you. We'll eat this
meal one course at a time."

The mountain continued to descend as the day wore on. As it did so, the
peaks on either side pulled away, until Avaunt was flying over the
forested hills of northern Praczedt. It was a wild country, smothered in
ash, oak, and cottonwood. Streams sparkled beneath the trees like veins
of silver in ore; the only signs that the Avauntois weren't alone in the
world were wisps of smoke from charcoalers' fires, and a lonely
tumbledown castle, its stones painted green with moss.

Inside the Captain's House, Razi added a tiny dot to his map. "Two days,
maybe three" he said quietly. "*La*, if that is where we are going."

* * *

Piaerre woke that night to a gentle, irregular tapping sound, like
pebbles clattering in a sieve. He slipped on his trousers and shirt,
threw off his quilt, and padded barefoot down the stairs.

"Ssh!" QueÃ§enne hissed from beside the front door. Her hair was tousled,
and she had her winter coat on over her nightdress. "Look at it."

Piaerre stood on tiptoes to peer through the half-open door over her
shoulder. To his left, aft, the sky was full of stars. To his right,
forward, it was a roiling mass of clouds. They had been dozing placidly,
letting the wind carry them where it would, when the mountain had plowed
into them without warning. Now they were panicking, dumping water to
lighten themselves so that they could get out of its way.

But their water wasn't falling as rain. Instead, hailstones the size of
pearls were bouncing off the cobblestones to lie cold, white, and
brilliant in the cracks between them. Piaerre had never seen anything
like it.

"Do you think it's a sign?" QueÃ§enne asked, hushed.

Piaerre blinked. "Uh, what? No. No, of course not. They're just frozen
raindrops."

"I know they're frozen raindrops," his sister hissed. "I mean... I mean
everything. All of it. Isn't there anything in all those books you read?
About what's happening?" She shivered and pulled her coat tight around
her shoulders. She was a year older than her brother, seventeen turning
thirty, as their father sometimes said, but for an unsettling instant
she seemed like a young child to Piaerre. For that one moment he saw
them standing there, still children, but only just, and understood why
his paere and maere sometimes looked at them so wistfully.

"We're still looking," he said. He swallowed dryly. "But the magician
who came to Forecastle? Thomas? He thinks we're headed for a town called
Tinhead. Razi thinks so too. It's just a couple of days away."

QueÃ§enne shivered. "What's there?"

Piaerre shrugged, already regretting what he'd said. "It's just a mining
town. It might not be where we're going anyway. Promise you won't say
anything, all right? I'm not supposed to tell anyone."

QueÃ§enne nodded. Brother and sister watched the hail bounce off the
cobblestones a few moments longer, until QueÃ§enne said, "I'm going back
to bed. If you find out for sure, will you tell me?"

Piaerre smiled in the dark, remembering a Yearagain Eve long ago. "Only
if you give me some of your peanuts."

His sister scowled. "Idiot. You didn't even really know what they'd got
for me."

Piaerre's smile broadened. "No, but it took you half a bag of peanuts to
figure that out." He dodged his sister's half-hearted punch, then let
her past. She was wearing the hair ribbon his father had bought for her
in Forecastle, he noticed, though he'd still never seen her use it
during the day.

He watched the hail bounce off the cobblestones until the draft through
the partly-open door raised goosebumps on his arms, then stooped and
picked up one of the tiny white grains. It felt odd for a moment, almost
powdery. Then it melted, leaving a slippery film between his thumb and
finger that evaporated almost instantly.

The drumming subsided and stopped as quickly as it had begun. *The
clouds must be moving away,* he thought. *Or maybe they've run dry.*
Suddenly tired, he closed the door and tiptoed back upstairs to bed.

As he lay there, curled up on his side with his head pillowed on his
arm, he wondered about the clouds Avaunt had panicked. What if people
below had been counting on them for rain? He imagined himself as a
groundling farmer, shaking his fist at the bad luck passing
indifferently over his head. His fields were too dry. One good rainfall,
just one, would bring those seeds and tentative sprouting shoots to
life, but the mountain had stolen it. He and his family would have to
leave now. If they stayed in their little village, with its one mill and
two lakes, they would starve. They loaded everything they had onto a
cart, but it was all books, everything, piles of them, endless lists of
verbs flying after each other like tiny birds...

* * *

Yellowsday, Heliodor 1^st^. The sun rose yellow in a perfect blue sky.
The hailstones had disappeared, leaving behind only a wet gleam on the
cobblestones. "Folk are saying it's a sign," Papaere Vurt grumbled,
mopping the last smear of egg yolk off his plate with a heel of crumbly
potato bread before shifting his chair to the side to make room for his
unwashed, yawning grandson. "Halfwits. Everything's an omen if you've a
mind to see it that way."

"They're just worried." Laeuc wrapped his hands around a mug of hot tea
to warm them. He had been up for an hour already, trying to keep the
rabbits off his newly-sown beans with a sling and and a clacker. Even
wearing an extra sweater, thick fleece mitts, and a scarf, it was cold
work. It would normally have been Piaerre's job---as Laeuc was fond of
saying, the whole point of having them was so that he and Elaiene could
stay in bed on cold mornings---but the bags under his son's eyes were
beginning to frighten him.

"Well, I just don't see the point of nabbling on about 'omens'," Vurt
continued. "Next thing you know, they'll be looking for treasure maps in
tea leaves."

"Oh, paere, don't be silly." Elaiene set the morning's second loaf of
bread on the table and sat down beside her husband. "Now, are you sure
you won't stay up here with us tonight?"

"Nothing wrong with my house," Vurt replied testily.

"I know, I know. But---well, I'd just sleep a little easier, that's all."

"Don't worry about me," he said gruffly. "If it looks like anything's
actually going to happen, I'll rabbit straight here." He paused, then
added, "Or Mayeule's. Sure to be a bed for me there." He elbowed
Piaerre, who rolled his eyes.

For Piaerre, that morning was eighteen rows long: eighteen long rows in
the old for'ard fields that had to be hoed for squash. He played
counting games in his head to pass the time. This row was almost done,
so call that three, which was one in six, which was... Fifteen percent was
too little, so maybe sixteen? Or seventeen? One row would be five
percent, if there were twenty rows, but there were only eighteen, so
each was... He paused and wiped the sweat from his forehead. Even open,
his jacket was too warm.

He shrugged off his jacket and hung it on a fence rail. Suddenly aware
of just how much tea he'd had at breakfast, he hopped the fence and
slipped into the trees. His father would have made fun of him, saying,
"No one pays attention to the goats, why would they pay attention to
you?" but Piaerre had always preferred a little more privacy at moments
like these. It was, he thought as he undid the buttons on the front of
his trousers, one of the few ways in which he really was like his
mother...

A voice suddenly shouted somewhere in the distance, then another. "This
way! This way! Catch him!" For just a heartbeat, Piaerre was thrown back
to the previous summer, when Fraederiq's cousins had come over from
Portside, and the three of them (plus Niquolas) had chased Piaerre like
a rabbit through the woods. But these voices were men's---Gaeston's, and
Marq's, and others---and Fraederiq was gone.

Finishing as quickly as he could, Piaerre refastened his trousers and
hurried toward the shouting. They were on the path to the tanning shed,
two dozen strides below him and fifty away. He saw a flash of brown
leather through the trees, then another. What were they chasing? Had a
goat somehow gotten out of the---

Jaromir and another Hett Piaerre didn't recognize burst out of the
trees. Piaerre instinctively ducked behind a tree, his heart racing, but
neither of the men looked up at the top of the bluff.

The second Hett stumbled on a stone, falling painfully to one knee.
"*Aust!*" Jaromir barked, yanking him back to his feet and pushing him
on. The man hesitated. "*Aust! Im augwe zus ishte apprenetekke!*" *Go*,
Piaerre translated, *Go, I'll be all right.*

The other Hett ran, limping. Jaromir hesitated a heartbeat, then doubled
back a half-dozen strides to where a sprigness bush the size of a shed
sprouted from the mountainside. Pushing the outer thorns aside, he
grabbed holds of the main branches and pulled.

"There! Over there!" At the renewed shouts, Jaromir let go of the
sprigness and dove into the trees on the other side of the path.

"This way!" squawked a voice overhead. Piaerre ducked instinctively as
Jack the parrot wheeled above him, calling to the Starboard Towners
pounding along the forest path below. "He's going left! No, your left,
you idiots, your left!" Four men with militia spears in their hands ran
by.

With a gulp, Piaerre slid down the steep slope to the path, then
hesitated. What had Jaromir been looking for under the bush? He pulled
the branches aside, wrinkling his nose at the cool, moist air that
spilled out. It was one of the old tunnels. How had Jaromir known it was
there? Piaerre had lived here his whole life, and he'd never known...

More shouting ahead pushed the question from Piaerre's mind. "Got him!"
Jack cried. "Good job, lads, good job!" Piaerre's heart sank. Four angry
Starboard Towners with spears, and a single unarmed Hett---there was no
way this story was going to have a happy ending.

Once, when Piaerre was six, a month-old kid grazing on the roof of
Mamaere Mayeule's had slipped on a wet patch of moss and fallen onto one
of the stone slab tables in her back yard. Piaerre had all but forgotten
about the incident, though at the time he had cried as the bosun carried
the injured kid away to be slaughtered. The soud of Gaeston's fists
hitting Jaromir's face and ribs brought the memory flooding back.

"And *that*! Eh? Was *that* better?" Each punch made a flat, smacking
sound. Jaromir lashed out with one leg, his boot catching Gaeston's
shin, but the Starboard Towner barely noticed. Like Marq and the other
two holding the Hett against a tree, Gaeston had dropped his spear on
the path. His hair and eyes were wild as he landed blow after blow.
"*What* did you think you were *doing*, eh? *Sneaking* around, *spying*
on decent people? We'll teach *you* what happens to *your* kind around
*here*!"

Gaeston paused for breath, flexing his fingers. His knuckles were raw,
Piaerre saw. His stomach rolled over. He ought to go and get the bosun,
or someone, but Jack would surely see him. When he glanced up, though,
the parrot was gone.

Gaeston smeared the sweat from his face with his sleeve. "Now, where are
your friends?" He slapped Jaromir hard across the face. "You listening?
I said, where are your damned-to-hells friends?"

The Hett looked up. Blood was dripping from his nose, his lip was split
in two places, and his eyes were already turning color and going puffy.
Panting, he said, "*Im niye pertakken.*" *I will not speak*, Piaerre
translated in his mind.

Another slap. "Speak normal," he ordered. "Now, I'm going to ask you one
more time. Where are you friends? Where are the others we saw you with?
What were you doing?"

"I could ask you the same question." The bosun's voice was as hard as
the mountain itself. He came striding up the path with Laeuc and Donaien
in tow, his own spear in his hand, a look like thunder on his face.

"Well?" he barked at the men holding Jaromir. "What are you waiting for?
Let him go!"

"But Uyves, he---" Marq began.

"I said *let him go*!" the bosun roared. "Or I'll have you in a pen 'til
we berth, I swear by my blood I will!"

Uyves glared Gaeston. "Now, here's what's going to happen," he said
flatly. "You four are going to clean yourselves up, and I mean *really*
clean, doctoring clean, and then *you* are going to find a shirt that
doesn't stink like a night jar and get a hoe and a bag of seeds and
you're going to get your sorry arses up to the field and plant some
weeping squash. And if I ever, *ever*, catch you playing highwayman
again, so help me, I'll give you a taste of what you gave him."

"Me!?" Gaeston said through clenched teeth. "What about him!? We caught
him in town! And there were others with him!"

"Well maybe they were trying to get out of a weeping
socks-for-your-mother hailstorm!" Uyves thundered. "Doesn't make it
right for them to be skulking around, but it doesn't weeping make it
right for you to play knights and little monsters with him either! You
*ever* do anything this lackwit again, I swear, I'll take a stripe off
your back as wide as my belt!"

"You mean, if I ever do your job for you again?" Gaeston spat back.

Uyves hands balled into meaty fists. The moment stretched. *He wants him
to*, Piaerre suddenly realized, horrified. *Gaeston wants him to hit
him.*

Uyves shoulders dropped a thumb's width. His hands unbunched. "You
listen to me," he said. "No, I mean, really listen. We're all sorry
about your boy. Saints know, Gaeston, we'd bring him back if we could,
any of us, but we can't, and neither can you, so you just have to get on
with things. You understand? You just have to get on with things."

Gaeston opened his mouth, closed it, and opened it again, like a fish in
a net gasping for one last breath. *Saints, he's going to cry,* Piaerre
thought, just as he snatched his spear up off the ground, pushed past
the bosun, and hurried down the path toward town.

"Poor bastard." Uyves said softly. He turned his glare on the others.
They had let go of Jaromir, who was leaning against the tree gasping for
air. "Now, ears open, all of you. What I just said to him goes for the
rest of you---until this is all over, just get *on* with it!" He waved an
arm in frustration.

He kept his glare on them as they picked up their spears and followed
Gaeston, shame-faced. When they were safely out of earshot, he rounded
on the Hett.

"This is twice you've made trouble for me," he said curtly. "There's a
third time, I'm putting you over the side whether we've berthed or not.
You hear me?" Jaromir nodded. "Right. Now get the hell out of here."

As the Hett limped unsteadily away, Piaerre stepped out from behind his
tree. "Figures," the bosun said sourly. "You been there the whole time?"

"Yes, *sra*," Piaerre said meekly.

The bosun looked up at Jack, who hopped from one foot to another. "It's
not my fault," the parrot squawked defensively. "I was watching everyone
else!"

The bosun cleared his throat and spat into the bushes. "Come on," he
said to Laeuc and Donaien. "Let's get back to work."

Piaerre followed the three men back to town. People were already
gossiping in the fields: what had Gaeston and the others been doing in
the forest with their spears? Their questions withered to nothing when
they caught sight of the bosun, his glower an angry counterpoint to the
embarrassment on Laeuc's, Donaien's, and Piaerre's.

Elaiene hurried over, wiping dirt from her hands on her field apron.
"What happened?" she demanded.

Uyves just kept walking. She turned to her husband. "Laeuc?"

He cleared his throat. "I'll tell you later."

"You'll tell me now!" she said sharply.

He glanced at the people in the field behind her, sighed, and quickly
filled her in. When he was done, Elaiene shook her head. "It's not your
fault. That poor man..."

Laeuc nodded. "I know. He still can't accept that Fraederiq's gone.
Hells, I don't blame him. I don't know what I'd do if we lost Piaerre
or---"

He stopped. Elaiene was looking at him, almost bewildered, as if she
hoped he'd kiss the end of her nose and say, "Only joking," the way he
always did. "I didn't mean Gaeston," she said. "I meant the tinker.
Saints and sweet roses, Laeuc, what about him?"

"I know, I know." Laeuc shook his head. "But---"

"There's no 'but'!" Elaiene pushed her husband's hand away. "I know he's
been your friend since, since you were old enough to *have* friends, but
damn it..." She hiccupped, then turned and hurried homeward alone.

* * *

After finishing twelve rows, Piaerre gave up and headed for the
captain's house. Immersed in the delicate task of prying apart the
water-stained pages of an ancient ledger, Razi didn't even look up when
his apprentice entered.

He didn't look up when the door drum thumped a few minutes later.
Piaerre waited a moment, listening for the quick footsteps and
high-pitched laughter that would tell him that the town's children were
just having a little fun on their way to chores, but instead he heard
the bosun say, "Bookster?"

"I'll get it," Piaerre said, setting the armful of books he'd been
stacking down on the center table. He didn't find it strange any longer
that the town bosun would drum and wait to be invited in when Razi was
working.

"Lad." The bosun nodded at Piaerre, shouldering past him and clumping
down the stairs into the library without taking off his boots.
"Bookster? A moment, if you please."

"*La*, of course. How may I help you?"

The bosun settled his weight on the stool Piaerre normally used.
Piaerre's heart sank as Uyves described what had happened to Jaromir the
night before, and his confrontation with Gaeston a few moments ago.
*It's not supposed to be like this*, he thought despairingly. *We're all
supposed to pull together, not fall apart.*

The bookster shook his head, looking tired rather than surprised. "*La*,
they are just afraid. And why not, with their world taking them
somewhere they've never been before."

"Mm. Thing is, it's only going to get worse." The bosun shifted
uncomfortably. "I know you're doing everything you can, but, well, is
there anything I can tell folk? Anything at all? Just to give them
something new to chew on?"

The bookster shook his head. "My apologies, bosun, but no, I have
nothing to give you."

"I do," Piaerre blurted. "We're going to a place called Tinhead. Maybe.
It's a mining town. In Praczedt." He met Razi's expressionless look
defiantly. Telling QueÃ§enne the night before had been a relief; for the
first time in days, Fraederiq hadn't fallen to his death in Piaerre's
dreams. And if Gaeston's beatings were anything like Fraederiq's had
been... In some obscure way, telling the bosun what he knew felt like an
apology to the Hett.

Uyves looked from Razi to Piaerre and back. "Bookster?"

Razi shrugged eloquently. "It may be. *La*, many things may be, though
few are. All we have is a hint, a name and some guesswork."

"Does the captain know about this?"

"He does. He was the one who asked *us* to keep it to ourselves until we
knew more."

The bosun pulled the bookster's map closer. "Well, where is this---"

A fist hammered on the window shutter. "Bosun! Bosun!" Armaend shouted
from the garden. "Come quick! The magician's here! And he's flying!"

Razi was off his stool before Armaend finished his sentence, but the
bosun and Piaerre still made it to the door ahead of him.

"Look!" Armaend said, pointing. Thomas's magic boat hung over the
library like a condor floating on an updraft. Its crisp white sail
bellied out beneath a green and white pennant that fluttered and snapped
in the wind. Its hull was the color of a summer cloud; stylized eyes
were painted on the bow, and a scaly fish tail detailed in orange and
gold flipped up saucily on its blunt stern. The word *Presumption*
coiled above the fish tail, the letters carved into the hull and painted
black.

Thomas sat at the stern in his brocade coat with his hand on the rudder,
glancing over the gunwale every few heartbeats. Beaming widely, he waved
at the crowd gathering below. A few people waved back. Beside Piaerre,
Razi made a disgusted sound in the back of his throat before slipping
unnoticed back into the Captain's House.

As the *Presumption* settled to the ground, Vurt limped over to join his
grandson. "Quite a sight, isn't it?" he said, putting his hand on
Piaerre's shoulder. Piaerre nodded, entranced. The flying boat was the
most beautiful thing he had ever seen.

It landed as gently as a falling leaf. Thomas looped a heavy cord around
the rudder handle, stood up, straightened his ever-shifting jacket, and
swung himself over the side. For a heartbeat Piaerre thought he might
walk on the air, like a hero of ancient times, but his boots hit Slip
Street with a very ordinary thud. A few people clapped.

"Good morning," Thomas said in flawless Avauntois. "Could someone please
direct me to the library?" The pattern on his jacket shifted as he
spoke, looking like a field of grass one moment, a leafy jungle canopy
the next.

"It's right behind you," someone called out, pointing.

Thomas looked over his shoulder, then back at the crowd, mock-surprise
writ large on his face. "Really? Why, how fortunate then that I happened
to land here. I might never have found it otherwise. And you must be
Bosun Uyves---good morning, good morning."

"Morning," Uyves said, arms folded across his chest. "I take it you're
the magician."

"Oh, not *the* magician, surely," Thomas said modestly. "*A* magician,
perhaps, but not *the* magician."

"Mm. Well, welcome to Starboard Town. Mind if I ask what brings you
here?"

"Business, I'm afraid." Thomas actually sounded regretful. "I would of
course have preferred my first visit to take place under less strained
circumstances---one hears so much in Forecastle about how quaint the
mountain's villages are---but---don't touch that!"

His bark came too late. Matthieu had already put his hand on the flying
ship's rudder. Bright green flames instantly crackled up and down it. He
yelped and pulled his hand back. "Ow, ow, ow," he whimpered, his simple
face twisted with pain. "It burned me!" He unclenched the fist he had
made and stared at it. The skin was already blistering.

"You really should ask permission before playing with other people's
toys," Thomas said reprovingly. "Especially if those people are---ah,
Razi! There you are!"

Piaerre looked over his shoulder as Razi closed the gate to the
Captain's House garden. He was wearing the same tan desert *deel* he had
worn for months, but had his worn black traveling bag over his shoulder
as well as his satchel. A broad belt Piaerre had never seen before was
buckled around his waist; a green bottle hung from it at his hip. A
sword hilt wrapped in black shark leather protruded from the bottle's
mouth like an oversized stopper. Something cold put a hand on Piaerre's
heart. Razi was leaving.

"Thomas," he acknowledged. The townspeople hushed, as if watching an
impromptu play. The lean, dark man had been their guest for months, but
suddenly he seemed as much a stranger as the red-headed magician.

"You've already packed? Splendid, splendid, truly. The captain was most
insistent about the need for haste. It appears we are indeed headed for
that village, what's it called?" His hand fluttered helplessly. "I'm so
bad with names sometimes."

Behind him, Uyves said, "You mean Tinhead?"

Thomas's smile broadened as a murmur ran through the crowd. "Ah, so he
*did* tell you. Bravo!"

"Hoy, Uyves!" Mamaere Mayeule's voice was as sharp as one of her kitchen
knives. "What's this?"

"We're headed for some mining town called Tinhead," the bosun said
testily. "And don't look at me like that, I just found out myself. What
I still don't know is, where the weeping hell this place is, and why in
the name of all the saints who juggle are we going there?"

"Here," the bookster said, handing the bosun his map before Thomas could
reply. "I've traced our route, and made a mark for Tinhead. As for why
we are going there, *la*, I swear by my blood, if I knew, I would tell
you."

The bosun took the folded piece of paper without looking at it. "You
would, would you?"

"As I just said." Razi met his gaze calmly.

"That's splendid, really," Thomas said warmly. "Now, Razi, if you
please? We shouldn't keep the captain waiting."

Razi tossed his bag into the boat. As he reached for the gunwale, Thomas
said, "Oh, but wait. What about your apprentice?"

Razi's face twitched. "I beg your pardon?"

Ignoring him, Thomas tapped his lower lip with one finger. "Now where
is---ah!" He pointed at Piaerre. "There you are! I trust you're ready
too?"

Piaerre stared at Thomas blankly. Ready to---oh no. He couldn't really
mean that, could he? "Um..."

"He will not need to accompany us," Razi said firmly.

"Really? But they're always so *helpful*, your apprentices." The
magician's smile broadened. "Besides, there ought to be at least one
Avauntois on board, don't you think? Just to keep us both honest?"

Piaerre could almost hear the space between the two men's locked eyes
crackle. He looked for his parents in the crowd. His father's mouth was
working, as if three different sentences were wrestling to get out. His
maere's was set in a firm line that meant 'no and no argument'.

But then his papaere elbowed him. "Well?" he grinned. "What are you
waiting for?"

"What?" Elaiene exploded, pushing past the bosun. "Have you gone mad?
He's not going anywhere! And he's certainly not getting in *that*!"

Papaere Vurt snorted. "Looks a lot safer than what I rode up on.
Piaerre, go get your things. I'll talk to your maere."

"No! Piaerre, you stay right---Piaerre!" But her son was already pelting
down Slip Street.

What to take, what to take? That was all Piaerre could think about as he
ran for home. He slowed to a walk in front of Mamaere Mayeule's. Better
not to rush---he had to give his grandfather time to wear his mother down.
But then he set off at a run again, unable to contain himself.

He burst through the front door and took the stairs three at a time.
Where was his satchel? Gloves, a hat, his scarf, socks, underwear (both
pairs), his second shirt, the knife his father had given him when he
turned twelve... It didn't seem like very much. What else? Not the little
wooden elephant on his window sill. Not the map of Avaunt hanging over
his bed, that he had drawn two years ago. Oh, wait, his pen case. He
tossed it on top of his clothes and hurried back down the stairs.

People stared at him as he puffed up the street. There was envy on the
children's faces, and on no few of the adults' as well. He squared his
shoulders, awkward, excited, and proud.

His family was standing together in a knot a few strides from the boat.
Elaiene had her arm around QueÃ§enne's shoulders; both of them looked
like they were about to cry.

His father and grandfather broke off their conversation as Piaerre
approached. "You can go," Laeuc said without preamble. "But you be
careful, understand? And you do exactly what Bookster Razi and Magister
Thomas tell you to."

"I will," Piaerre said breathlessly. He looked at his mother. "I
promise."

"Come here," Elaiene said. She hugged him fiercely. "I love you," she
whispered in his ear.

Piaerre nodded against her shoulder. "I will," he repeated. His own eyes
suddenly felt hot. He stepped away and turned to say goodbye to his
sister. To both of their surprise, she hugged him as well, quick and
awkward.

The bosun put out his hand. "Good luck, lad." Piaerre nodded again,
pressing his palm against Uyves', then his father's and grandfather's.

Razi and Thomas were already on board. Razi took the satchel his
apprentice handed up to him, sliding over to make room as Piaerre pulled
himself up over the side.

Thomas slipped the stay cord off the rudder. "Sit on the other side," he
ordered, his mocking smile absent for once. "We'll be off balance
otherwise. And hold onto the gunwale. Oh, and whatever you do, don't
stand up. Ready? Here we go."

He didn't do anything that Piaerre could see, but the sail suddenly
bellied out, full of wind. The boat rose smoothly and swiftly into the
air.

His knuckles white on the gunwale, Piaerre peered over the side. Below,
his family and others were waving. He waved back a little shakily. *So
this is what birds see,* he thought. It was different than looking down
on the world from Avaunt---closer, faster, and a thousand times more
exciting.

The Captain's House was a slate-roofed L, the carefully-tended shrubs in
its vanity garden tufts of green wool. In front of it, a lake of brown
faces looked up, some shading their eyes, others waving. A few people on
the fringes of the crowd had already turned away to go back to work.
Beneath them, Slip Street's cobbles made a crooked gray stream between
the canyon walls of the houses on either side. Goats bleated from
rooftops; chickens squawked and clucked in the coops that stood behind
every house; smoke rose from a double dozen chimneys, and kites
fluttered in the wind.

The boat's little green and white pennant snapped above the sail as they
climbed higher and higher. Starboard Town seemed so small, like
children's blocks left behind in the forest that blanketed the
mountainside. Piaerre craned his neck to see Mamaere Mayeule's yard,
then counted rooftops. Ten, eleven, twelve... That must his house there,
with a tidy stack of brush against the back wall, and two shirts and a
sheet drying on a line.

He leaned out slightly. He could see Papaere Vurt's verandah. Past that
was nothing but empty air. Vertigo suddenly rose in his throat as he
remembered Fraederiq falling ...

Thomas banked the boat to starboard. "Rather the view, isn't it?" he
said loudly. "Shall we go under?"

"What? I mean, pardon?"

"Shall we go under the mountain? It's quite spectacular."

"No," Razi said firmly. "Straight to Forecastle."

Thomas rolled his eyes at Piaerre and swung the rudder to the side. The
*Presumption* came about obediently. Piaerre suddenly realized that they
were sailing straight into the wind. He wasn't sure, but he thought that
was supposed to be impossible. *Then again,* he thought, *anyone who can
make a boat fly probably has a different notion of what 'possible'
means.*

The *Presumption* crested the ridge forward of town. All of a sudden
they weren't over the mountain any more. They were *beside* it.
Piaerre's ears were freezing, but he didn't think to put his hat on
until Razi pulled it out of his satchel and handed it to him. The
mountain was so big, so rich with detail. The sheet moss that hung on
the braided pines was northern, as were the pines themselves. The jungle
creeper vines that sprouted brown and yellow from tiny cracks in the
rock were from the south. The cold killed them off each time Avaunt went
north, but they recolonized its sheer sides when the mountain returned
to Mau Ngapcha.

And the birds---how could he not have realized there were so many birds?
Thousands of them nested in every nook and cranny they could find, on
ledges too narrow even for goats' feet, in the branches, or in round
nests made of mud and sticks that clung directly to the rock. Irvings
from the north, blue-crested cockatiels from the south, tiny brown
wrens, swifts with wings like a pirate's moustache, owls, petrels, and
others Piaerre couldn't name.

A tawny-crested gull suddenly appeared beside them, wings spread to hold
the breeze as it tilted its head to study the boat. No food there, it
decided, tipping to the side and soaring away with a disappointed cry.

Piaerre twisted around. Starboard Town had already disappeared behind
them. Everything human seemed insignificant compared to the mountain's
looming bulk. *We're just fleas on a whale's back,* he thought, with no
regard at all for zoology.

"*La*, over there," Razi said, pointing. "See?" Two orange-furred banana
trolls, mother and child from their size, swung from branch to branch
through the pines.

"Whoa," Piaerre said in awe.

Razi smiled. "They will have tales to tell when they get home, I think."

Piaerre gaped. "Do you think they're Gifted?"

"Ah? Oh, *la*, no, no, I just meant..." The bookster shook his head,
amused. "No, I'm sure they're not. They would have asked for sanctuary
by now if they were."

"Oh." Other than Jack, and the condors at the Hardeck, Piaerre had never
met a Gifted animal. A family of Gifted trolls on the mountain would
have been---

"Whoa!" He clutched the gunwale as the boat turned sharply---so sharply
that even Razi lurched a step.

"Thomas!" the bookster said sharply. "*La*, are you trying to---"

"Look!" the magician interrupted. "There, you see?"

For a moment Piaerre didn't understand what the magician was pointing
at, but then the darkness on the face of the cliff resolved itself. It
was the mouth of a tunnel, rectangular, tilted a quarter of an arc off
true. There were steps inside, on what was now the right-hand wall.

Beside the tunnel, two men in rough clothes were scrambling up the rock
face as fast as they could. Both wore climbing harnesses, which were
anchored by long ropes to trees growing above the tunnel mouth, and both
had axes in their hands. A moment later they dove into the undergrowth
and vanished from view.

Razi pointed at the tunnel mouth. "Can you take us closer?" he asked
Thomas.

The magician nodded briskly. "Your wish is my every desire. Best to hold
on, though, I should think. The wind might be a little playful."

'Playful' turned out to be an understatement. As they neared the cliff,
the air being shouldered aside by the mountain made the *Presumption*
dance like a scrap of cinnamon bark in a pot of boiling water. Thomas
held them as steady as he could twenty strides away from the rock while
they studied the opening. The tunnel mouth itself had been weathered
smooth by centuries of southern rain, desert grit storms, and northern
frost, but inside, the edges of the stairs were still sharp.

Clustered around it were a dozen or more freshly-cut stumps. *It would
have been hellish hard work*, Piaerre thought with grudging admiration.
Dangling in a harness as you swung the ax, having to watch that you
didn't chop through the rope you were hanging on... They must have been at
it for hours.

But something else was asking for his attention. Something about the
coat the bigger man had been wearing... "That was the Hett that was with
Jaromir!" he exclaimed. "When Gaeston and the others---when they were
chasing him!"

"Really? And who might Jaromir be?" Thomas asked.

"He's a Hett. A tinker. He's Vaszlav's new apprentice." Piaerre's words
tumbled over one another.

Razi studied the mountainside thoughtfully. "*La*, well, I think this
deserves the captain's notice, don't you?"

"Indeed," Thomas said. "Travel is *so* interesting, isn't it?" He smiled
at his passengers and nudged the rudder, setting the boat's course
forward once again.

* * *

They reached Forecastle's air dock an hour later. It was a weatherbeaten
pine shelf, ten strides deep and forty long, whose tree-trunk railing
posts doubled as stanchions. A small counterbalanced crane was the
dock's only guard; it was tiny compared to the four-story monsters at
Ruuda-in-Ruuda or Yadanapore, but adequate for the clouds, magic
carpets, and more unusual visitors the mountain received between its
northern and southern berths.

As they neared the dock, Thomas concentrated on steering the nimble
little boat across the wind of the mountain's passage, while Razi hung a
roll of canvas over the side of the *Presumption* as a bumper. He did it
without asking Thomas, Piaerre noticed, just as he had known where to
find a blanket to cover his legs when his toenails began to pale with
cold. *He tried to kill my previous apprentice.* Piaerre wiped drip off
his nose and hunched his shoulders inside his coat for warmth.

Razi stood on the gunwale as the *Presumption* nosed up to the dock,
stepping off it lightly as if there was an ocean to fall into, instead
of a gallop of empty air and jagged mountain peaks. While he tied the
boat up, Thomas lowered the sail, wrapped cords around it to hold it
against the boom, and snibbed the cabin hatch shut.

Shouldering an embroidered canvas bag, he waved Piaerre ahead. "After
you."

"Thanks." Piaerre passed his satchel to Razi and clambered awkwardly
over the side.

Broad stairs cut directly into the mountain led them up to town. A blue
customs booth waited patiently at the top, its shutters firmly fastened,
a weathered sign saying "Wait Here" in four different languages on its
door. Razi unlatched the gate, waited for Thomas and Piaerre to go
through, and closed it behind them.

The mood on Forecastle's streets was stretched as taut as a violin
string. Everyone was in a hurry, heads down, faces set. Piaerre saw
people measure them sidelong as they passed---a pale red-headed man in an
ever-changing coat, a tall black figure in a dust-colored *deel*, and a
round-faced boy as brown as chocolate trailing in their wake---but no one
smiled or said hello.

As they neared the market square, Piaerre heard voices shouting in
unison. They rounded the last corner to discover that half the market
stalls had been cleared away to make a parade ground. On it, the
Forecastle militia were doing the same drills as their counterparts in
Starboard Town, Portside, and Aft Landing. "Hwah!" Forecastle's
gray-haired bosun and his three mates shouted orders, corrections,
encouragement, and abuse as twenty squads of spearmen and archers lunged
and kneeled, drew and released. Beneath their boots lay the outline map
of Cherne he had heard described, but had never seen before. White
cobblestones set among the gray showed the continent's coastline; red
ones showed the mountain's path from Mau Ngapcha to Normous Berth. A
spatter-edged streak of paint showed the mountain's most recent course.

As usual, a pair of guards stood outside the Hardeck's main doors. These
ones, though, wore helmets and gorgets, and gave the approaching
travelers a careful up-and-down as they climbed the stairs. "Magister,"
one said to Thomas, nodding respectfully while the other opened the door
for them.

"Thank you," the magician said politely. He swept inside like royalty,
with Razi and Piaerre in his wake. The door closed behind them with a
thud.

The captain was upstairs in the Grand Hall, his hands clasped behind his
back, a frown furrowed on his forehead. He turned away from the window
as they entered. "Bookster, magister," he nodded, cocking an eyebrow at
Piaerre.

"Captain," Razi said, raising his palms. "You remember my apprentice?"

"Of course." He returned Piaerre's salute. "I hope he's proving more
useful to you than my clerks are to me. It's been like herding kittens.
Anyway---have you found anything?"

"In the library?" Razi shook his head. "*La*, no, I regret I have not.
But on the way here, we did notice something that might be of interest."
He quickly described what they had seen near the tunnel's mouth.

The captain's stern look grew stonier as he listened. "By all the failed
saints." He looked like he wanted to spit on someone. "Klaues swore this
was nothing to do with his people."

"*La*, perhaps he is as ignorant of what is being done as we were. From
what I am told, the tinker's assistant is new to the mountain."

"I suppose." The captain ran a thumbnail between two teeth and flicked
whatever he'd fished out onto a nearby plant. "Son of a sow. Anyway, I
have some news for you. It seems you two were right. We're headed
straight for Tinhead. Take a look." He gestured at the window.

Piaerre followed the line of the captain's pointing finger. The
mountains in front of them were ridged and ragged like a crumpled
carpet, snow-white and pine-green. Without warning, the scene swam and
re-formed. Piaerre yelped and threw up his arms even as the the view
steadied again.

"Oh, well done," Thomas murmured appreciatively. "Well done."

The floor-to-ceiling panes on either side of the captain still showed
what they had a moment before, but the one in the center had pulled the
view closer. Instead of mountains fifty gallops away, they were looking
at a neat town from what appeared to be no more than a thousand strides.
Its buildings themselves were all made of gray brick, and roofed with
dark slate shingles. They were laid out in a figure eight around two
squares, each as big as Forecastle's markets. The squares themselves
were cobbled with bricks only slightly darker than those used in the
houses, and crisscrossed with shallow troughs for drainage. Sun
glistened on glass in the buildings' windows---more glass than Piaerre had
ever seen---but the only sign of life was a lone jay that fluttered away
even as they watched.

Thomas whistled. "It's beautiful work," he said, for once sounding
sincere. "Absolutely beautiful. Korrandarrenduk?"

The captain shook his head. "Ip of Seyferte. About three hundred years
ago. Used to be another one at Aft Landing, but some Bantangui pirate
smashed it to bits about a hundred years ago."

"Really? May he be reborn to misery a thousand thousand times." Thomas
spoke the curse without rancor as he brushed his fingertips over the
glass. "Do you mind me asking its price?"

The captain shrugged. "My name. And I can't leave the mountain."

"Ah." Thomas nodded sympathetically. "Ip was never one to use a pin when
a lance would do. I'm surprised I didn't know it was here."

"We prefer not to noise it about." The captain glanced at Piaerre.
"Though I thought most of my own people knew about it."

"Oh, I'm sure he was just taken by surprise," Thomas said absently. "If
one hasn't seen such things before, you know."

"Captain, can you move the focus?" Razi interrupted.

The captain nodded. "Yes. But only to things that you could see through
the window anyway."

Razi pursed his lips. "*La*, so, where is the picture of Tinhead? The
one from the book?"

The captain jerked his thumb at the wall. "Up there. Next to the
whales."

"What? You tore it out of the book?"

"No, of course not. I used a razor. Why?"

Razi stared at the captain. "Perhaps... *la*, perhaps in future a copy
would suffice, yes?" he said stiffly.

The captain and Thomas exchanged amused looks as Razi took the framed
page down from the wall. He held it up in front of the window, glancing
back and forth between the scene in the picture and the one in front of
him.

"*La*, so, can you show us what's to the left, please?" he asked. The
captain passed his hand slowly in front of the window. The view flowed
obediently, making Piaerre's stomach lurch. Trees, not so different from
Avaunt's pines, and rocks, and a fence around an empty pasture.

Thomas craned his neck to look over the bookster's shoulder. "May I
ask...?."

Razi nodded, tapping the picture with his finger. "*La*, here, you see?
The mountain would tuck in there quite snugly. If we are going to
berth..." He frowned. "Can you go up a little, please? No, I'm sorry, back
to the settlement, please, then up. And a little to the right, I think."

The view panned the other way. Tinhead reappeared for an instant as the
mirror took them up, up, up the side of the mountain.

"There!" Razi said sharply, pointing. A mass of stone, too regular to be
natural, loomed among the trees. It was some sort of tower, but it was
taller than anything Piaerre had ever seen---twenty stories at least.

"Can you bring us closer?" Razi asked.

The captain shook his head. "That's the best I can do. The old captain
was better at this than I am."

"Ah. Thomas?"

The magician shook his head. "Regretfully, no. I'm, well, I'm astonished
we can see this much. As I said, it's marvelous work."

"*Saad*," Razi swore softly.

Thomas raised an eyebrow. "My dear bookster." He nodded toward Piaerre.
"Young ears, please."

"*Ahete saad anneme epe assa*," Piaerre said belligerently.

The magician looked at him sharply, startled, then laughed. "I hope
not," he said. "But maybe in the next life, as punishment for my sins in
this one." He put his laugh away and turned back to Razi. "So, why build
a tower so far away from anything worth looking at?"

"Because you expect something worth looking at to come to it?" Piaerre
said. He blushed under the sudden weight of three pairs of adult eyes.
"Sorry," he muttered. "I just thought..."

Thomas smiled at Razi. "You *do* pick bright ones, don't you? One day I
shall have to ask you how you find them; my apprentices have all been a
great disappointment to me."

"Hold the reins a moment," the captain interrupted. "Whatever that thing
is, it wasn't built yesterday. It must have taken years! Do you think
someone's been planning this for that long?"

Thomas spread his hands. "Who can say? A closer look might give us some
answers."

The captain frowned. "Might be safer to send one of the condors. Less
obvious, too, than that boat of yours."

"*La*, but how long would that take?" Razi said. "If we left now, we
could be back in time to spoil your dinner."

"Thanks," the captain said sourly. He frowned at the view in front of
him. If the top-most branches of the trees hadn't been swaying gently in
the afternoon breeze, Piaerre could have believed it was some strange
kind of painting. "All right. Is there anything you need?"

The bookster caught Piaerre's eye and shook his head almost
imperceptibly: no, Piaerre wouldn't be coming along. Piaerre nodded.
Teenage boys might stow away to have adventures in stories, but this
wasn't a story.

"Ask my clerk, Auphonse," the captain replied to whatever Thomas had
just said. "He might be able to find some. Do you want a couple of my
men along, just in case?"

"I'm sure we'll be fine," Thomas said politely. "Razi? Have I missed
anything?"

The bookster shook his head, studying the scene as if to memorize it.
"*La*, no, you are most thorough. If we leave now, we ought to have
enough light to find our way back." He gestured toward the door. "After
you?"

As they turned to leave, Razi pulled a string of coins out of a pocket
hidden in his *deel*. "Take these and find us a room," he ordered, as if
Piaerre had done it for him a dozen times before. "Somewhere close
by---*la*, closer than the Green Pig, if you can. I would prefer quiet to
noisy, and small to large. And with a bath."

A few minutes later, Piaerre stood on Forecastle's steps, watching Razi
and Thomas's retreating backs as they hurried back toward the dock. He
hefted the string of coins. It was more money than he had ever held in
his life. Somewhere with a hot bath *would* be nice. Somewhere with a
hot bath and a good kitchen would be even nicer.

Piaerre didn't think of himself as shy, but he had never had to ask a
stranger for directions before. Starboard Town only had two streets, and
he knew the paths in the forest around it as well as he knew the cracks
in the glaze on his favorite mug. He was a stranger here, though,
despite his many visits. He had always been able to follow his father
through the streets and half-streets that doubled back on themselves,
met at odd angles, or, in the case of the one he was now on, dead-ended
against the front door of a bootmaker's.

Voices rose and fell inside. Suddenly homesick, he looked for a door
drum or a cord, but saw neither. "Hello?" he said uncertainly, pushing
the door open.

The two women sitting behind the long trestle table inside looked up and
said, "Clear day," in unison. Both had their hair in braids, which they
had pulled back and tied with twist-ends of silk. Planks of dark brown
leather lay in neat stacks behind them, while half-finished boots lay in
pieces or stood upside down on lasts. A samovar as big as a goat's head
took up one entire end of the table. The sugary smell coming from it
made Piaerre's stomach grumble.

Piaerre cleared his throat. "Clear day. I'm, um, we're visiting. From
Starboard Town."

"With the bosun?" the woman on Piaerre's left asked eagerly.

The one on his right rolled her eyes. "Shush, Gisaelle, let the boy
speak."

"Um, no, the bosun isn't with us. I'm just, I'm supposed to find us
somewhere to stay. Do you know anywhere? Somewhere small and nearby?"

"The Sign of the Three Rabbits," the woman on the right said. "It's the
bosun's favorite when he's here, isn't that right, Gisaelle? Very quiet
for those who don't want to be disturbed." She elbowed the other woman
in the ribs.

Gisaelle blushed. "It's a very good inn," she said, a little weakly.
"Everyone says so."

The first woman snorted. "I'm sure *everyone* does. Anyway, two up on
your left, at the cordwainer's, go down that alley, left again to the
stairs by the flower seller, top of the stairs. Not far at all, isn't
that right, Gisaelle?"

"Far enough for people who don't want other people sticking their noses
into things that are none of their business," the woman on the left said
sharply.

When they wanted a scare, Avauntois children told each other about a
house in Aft Landing (or maybe Portside, it depended who was telling the
story). There was nothing behind its back door but empty air, and when
children were nosy, the evil magician (or Hett, or ghost) who lived
there sent them out back to fetch firewood.

Piaerre felt like he had just stepped through that door.

He raised his palms with a hasty, "Thank you, ladies," he said. "That's
very helpful. Much appreciated." He turned and fled.

He didn't stop laughing until he reached the cordwainer's. He would
definitely have to ask the bosun about his boots when he got home. Of
course, the story would be better if he knew the name of the shop...

He turned impulsively at the thought. The small figure that had been
trailing two dozen strides behind him instantly turned around as well.
"Hoy!" Piaerre exclaimed. "Hoy, you!" It was the ragtag girl who had
tried to steal the bosun's wallet. "Stop!" But she had already
disappeared into a side alley like a rabbit going down a hole.

He thrust his hand into his pocket. The coins Razi had given him were
still there. He whooshedwith relief. Wasn't she supposed to be in a
dungeon? He turned around again and hurried up the street. As soon as he
found an inn, he would go back to the Hardeck and tell them she had
escaped.

The Sign of the Three Rabbits was as big as the Captain's House in
Starboard Town, and just as well kept. Knee-high wooden planters filled
with red and yellow azaleas stood guard on either side of its spotless
yellow front door. More flowers watched primly from their own planters
on the window sills. Symmetric blue whorls were painted on either side
of the door frame, Bantangui style, representing the ears that were
supposed to listen for malicious gossip about the house's residents. The
old woman snoring in a wicker rocking chair on the balcony above the
door made the picture complete.

Piaerre yanked the braided cord that hung by the door. A drum thumped
inside, but no one answered. He pulled the cord again, harder. The
snoring above him stopped.

"Who is it?" a voice yawned.

Piaerre stepped back from the door and looked up. The old woman was
rubbing her eyes, her dark brown face silhouetted against the sky.

"Good morning, *sra*," he said. "I'm looking for a room for the night.
The bootmakers said you might have one?"

The old woman dug the last of her nap out of the corners of her eyes.
"On your own?" she asked doubtfully.

Piaerre shook his head. "No, *sra*. I'm Bookster Razi's apprentice. The
room's for both of us." He held up his string of coins and jingled them.

"Ah. Well, in that case, I'll be right down."

A few minutes later, Piaerre had exchanged two half-rings and sixpence
for a pair of wooden tokens that might have looked like rabbits to the
inexpert carver who had made them. The old woman certainly knew Bosun
Uyves. Very popular, the bosun was. Easy to see why, with shoulders like
his, and that smile, and of course everyone said he was such a good
dancer, not that she had ever had a chance herself, her dancing days
were far behind her, just as Piaerre's were still in front of him. He
did dance, didn't he? With anyone in particular yet? No? Oh, that would
come, that would come, not to worry. Why, she herself had been fifteen
the first time someone had asked her to dance. A vagabond, he turned out
to be, not like the bosun, but of course she couldn't have known that at
the time. Now, did he want to leave those bags with her, or in the room?
Oh, yes, the room had a lock, of course, and not just for when they were
berthed at Normous or Mau Ngapcha, no, sad to say, the mountain had
thieves of its own, indwellers most of them, or Hett, the Endless alone
knew why the captain let either onto the mountain, not that she was
questioning his judgment, of course, he was a fine captain, though if
anyone were to ask her opinion, well, his predecessor had been much
firmer about such things. That campground of theirs by the sawdust tips
was as good as being a little town of its own now, wasn't it? And that
house on Squid Street, well, it shouldn't be allowed, not that it was
her place to decide that, of course, the captain knew his business, he
was a fine man, just as Bosun Uyves was a fine, fine man, very popular,
and easy to see why, of course, with shoulders like his, and that smile...

Her words splashed over Piaerre like a small waterfall. He kept smiling
and saying, "Yes, *sra*," and "Thank you," and turning toward the door,
but the torrent of words didn't stop until he backpedaled through the
door onto the street.

And so Piaerre found himself alone in the biggest town on Avaunt with
time on his hands and money in his pocket. Emboldened by his success in
finding the Three Rabbits, he asked a man walking by with a rack of
skewered chickens over his shoulder for directions. Booksellers' Cross?
Down that way was fastest. Piaerre ducked to avoid being clouted by a
dead chicken as the man turned to point. Past the water pump, up the
stairs, left at Juliaen's bakery, well, it was still called Juliaen's,
then straight on---he couldn't miss it.

The route was so direct, at least by Forecastle's standards, that it
took Piaerre two tries to lose his way. Anyone watching would have
thought he was wandering aimlessly---at least, that's what he hoped. He
peered into shop windows, stopped to study himself in the half-height
mirror that stood in front of a tailor's (chained to the wall, he
noticed, even with the tailor sitting a stride away), and doubled back
without warning half a dozen times. He never looked directly behind him.
He most particularly never whirled around to chase the ragged figure
trailing in his wake. It was just like trying to round up Mamaere
Mayeule's cat when she strayed. You had to get *her* to chase *you*...

But his shadow disappeared some time between him looking at a chandler's
wares and him putting his foot up on an empty create next to a cooper's
to re-tie his bootlace. Disappointed, he doubled back once more, but she
was gone. He shrugged, trying to be philosophical. At least now he could
go look at the books.

His father had first taken him to Booksellers' Cross on his eighth
naming day, while his mother and QueÃ§enne shopped for thread, cinnamon,
and some of the waxy *achatouc* sap that Papaere Vurt rubbed on his
stump when it ached. The booksellers had rolled their eyes at one
another, all thinking, "Here's another one," all remembering themselves
at that age.

Novels and picture books, pamphlets and diaries, thick volumes of
poetry, medicine, recipes, magic, and law, in Avauntois, Enswer,
Seyfertois, Ruudian, Uwsian, Bantangui, and Praczny... Lost among the
petrified learning, the frozen elsewheres and elsewhens, Piaerre took no
more notice of time passing than he did of the ground beneath his feet.

He leafed through every Praczny book he found, mumbling the words under
his breath. Finally he selected two: one a tract on the rights of Gifted
animals, the other a collection of romantic stories, full of noble
knights who had to leave their ladies behind for seven years while they
quested after tin rings that held their fathers' souls, or magicians who
were wrongly imprisoned for necromancy, only to be saved (or doomed)
when the king's youngest son fell in love with them. He weighed them in
his hands, then put the tract back. His mother and QueÃ§enne would prefer
the stories, he told himself, not quite old enough to admit to himself
that he'd enjoy them too.

"Three rings," the bookseller said curtly when Piaerre asked its price.

Piaerre's jaw dropped. "Three rings!?"

The bookseller shrugged without looking up from the water-stained
collection of fishing poems he was carefully taking apart. He was as
tall as Razi, but skinny where Piaerre's teacher was merely lean, and
had stupendously bad breath. "That's cheap. Stupendously cheap. Possibly
the only cheap things left on the mountain, books. Beans and wool,
they're what's in fashion these days." He snorted, sawing delicately at
the book's binding with a scaling knife.

Piaerre sighed. A half-ring, and he might have bought it. He wouldn't
have been able to afford anything else until his naming day, but he
might have. But---three rings!

He scowled. "A half-ring and eightpence," he said.

"No." The bookseller didn't even look up.

"All right, a half and ten," Piaerre offered. "Look, the spine is almost
broken. I'll have to stitch the pages back together in a year or two."

The bookseller glanced at the book, then at Piaerre. "Two rings a half
and sixpence, not a fingernail less." He shrugged again. "I can't sell
it for less than I paid, can I?"

"I suppose not," Piaerre said, defeated. He could probably find another
book that he could afford, but after deciding he wanted the stories,
anything else would feel like second best. And anyway, it was getting
late. He should get back to the Hardeck and wait for Razi.

Two new guards stood at the Hardeck's front doors. As far as they were
concerned, young Starboard Towners belonged in Starboard Town while all
this fuss was going on. "But I'm Bookster Razi's apprentice," Piaerre
protested. "I was getting us a room. At the Three Rabbits."

One of the guards raised his eyebrows at that. The other shook his head.
"Can't go in without an escort."

"But I'm supposed to meet him here!"

The guard shook his head again. "Not without an escort."

"All right." Piaerre thought for a moment. "Well, if you see the
bookster, can you please tell him we're at the Sign of the Three
Rabbits?"

The guard supposed he could do that. He wasn't trying to be difficult;
hells, he had walked right into the Hardeck himself not more than a
month ago to complain about late payment for a cartload of slate
shingles, but things had been different then. Things had been *normal*.
And besides, he hadn't been on duty then. He probably would have let
himself in even if he had been, but not these days. The mountain was
going saints knew where, maybe all the way to the Worldrim, and, well,
under the circumstances, you couldn't be too careful.

He didn't say any of this aloud, of course. All he said was, "If I see
him." Piaerre thanked him and headed for the docks. The guard sighed,
rolled his shoulders to loosen a kink in his neck, and bleakly tallied
the hours that still stood between him and the plate of sausages his
wife was probably putting in the oven at that very moment to keep warm.

The docks were awash with shadows by the time Piaerre reached them. It
was cold, too, and the air felt damp. He shivered and did up the top
button of his coat.

The land below was beautiful. Orange sunset reflected off ponds and
streams in the valleys, the snow on the peaks of the mountains around
Avaunt, and the clouds grazing near the horizon. It could have been the
approach to Normous Berth, except there wasn't a road or a building in
sight. Traders from all over the Nine Marches would be on the road right
now to meet the mountain at that centuries-old rendezvous. How many of
them already knew that Avaunt wasn't going to make it this time?

Forecastle's evening drum thumped behind him like a giant heartbeat. His
stomach grumbled in response. Shivering, he fished a stick of dried
rabbit sausage out of his pocket and bit the end off. He'd bought it on
his wander to Bookseller's Cross; it was spicier than he was used to,
and there was more gristle in it than in his mother's, but it was still
delicious. He had a few pieces of dried apricot, too, but---

There! That dot. He brought his hand up to shield his eyes. It had to be
the *Presumption*. She was coming in fast, Piaerre realized---very fast.

He waved. A tiny arm wave back. He dragged a couple of bumpers over to
the dock's edge, looped their nooses around stayposts, and kicked them
under the railing to dangle over the side.

She was only fifty strides away when Piaerre realized that something was
sticking out of her hull. His belly went cold. It was an arrow, as thick
around as his arm and as long as his leg. Splinters starred the planks
around it like a frozen shout of pain.

Thomas steered her in close, yelling, "Clear away!" Piaerre scrambled
back. As the *Presumption* thudded against the bumpers, Thomas threw an
end of rope at Piaerre. "Tie her fast!" he ordered. "Fates and Furies,
what a mess!"

"Where's Razi?" Piaerre blurted.

Thomas slipped around the mast to the boat's bow and jumped onto the
dock with another length of line in his hand, heedless of the
half-gallop of empty air below him. "It's not that I mind, you
understand," he said, tying the boat fast. "Personally, I don't think it
would be that much of a loss. But *she* would never believe that I
didn't have a hand in it, and *that* would be trouble. Here, get that
gangplank over here." He hopped back into the boat.

"But where's Razi?" Piaerre repeated. Panic was like cold soup in this
throat.

Thomas crouched down. "Come on, you're messing up my boat." He
straightened with a grunt, his right arm around Razi's back, his left
holding the bookster's arm across his shoulders.

"*La*, so, put down a rug next time," Razi mumbled, his hand pressed
against his side. He smiled weakly at Piaerre. His *deel* was slick red
with blood. More was leaking through his fingers.

He and Thomas stumbled down the gangplank like drunkards. As they
reached the dock, the bookster tripped over his own unsteady feet and
collapsed.

* * *

"He's half-empty," Nuu Ciy said matter-of-factly, washing her hands in a
basin of soapy water. "And if it had been a thumbnail to the left, he'd
be compost. As it is..." The captain's wife was a head shorter than
Piaerre, with close-cropped hair and a large mole on one cheek. She was
short, even for a Bantangui, but carried herself as if she was as big as
the mountain.

"As it is?" the captain asked.

Nuu Ciy dried her hands on a scrap of cotton bandage and dropped it into
a shallow copper bowl on the table beside her. Its sides were sticky
with Razi's blood. She sighed and started untying her apron. "As it is,
he'll live, unless he does it again."

"Thank you, love." The infirmary on the ground floor of the Hardeck was
as long as the Grand Hall, but only half as wide. Two dozen wooden beds
lined one wall; the other was completely taken up with shelves. Bandages
and spools of strong cotton thread stood next to scalpels with blades
the size of a baby's thumbnail and bone saws that Piaerre would have
struggled to lift one-handed. There were no windows: the only light came
from fist-sized pieces of dayglass set in bamboo sconces above the beds.

The trio of guardsmen who had carried Razi from the dock up to the
Hardeck still stood in a cluster at its entrance, waving passers-by away
while keeping one eye on the surgery inside. Nuu Ciy had stitched Razi's
wound closed as carefully as Papaere Vurt would stitch up a torn boot,
and about as gently. She had muttered small spells the whole time, pleas
for strength and wards against infection that made her hands glisten
faintly. Piaerre wondered what she was giving up on Razi's behalf: a
little more of her sense of smell, perhaps, or her memory of the bright
blue dress she had worn on her tenth naming day.

Through it all, Thomas sat on the bed next to Razi's, watching Nuu Ciy's
work with polite curiosity. Piaerre had almost (almost) punched him when
he told Piaerre that he couldn't help Razi. "But he's dying!" Piaerre
had shouted, frantic with fear.

"Yes, so the faster you get help, the better."

"But why can't you *fix* him!?" Piaerre pleaded.

"Because I like being able to open doors for myself," Thomas snapped.
"And having to return to this dreary venue once a year for the rest of
my life would be unspeakably tiresome. Now, are you going to go and get
him some help, or shall we wait for those imbecile condors?"

Piaerre had gone for help.

As Nuu Ciy's assistants scrubbed streaks of blood off her arms, the
captain turned to the magician. "So, there was no warning at all?" he
demanded once again.

Thomas shook his head. "None. As I said before---twice, I believe---we were
still a gallop or two from town.They must have hidden siege bows in the
trees by the road." He yawned suddenly. "Clever of them, I must say. I
mean, they can't actually have been *expecting* something like the
*Presumption* to come along."

The captain's scowl showed what he thought of Tinhead's inhabitants
being clever. "And there was just the one shot?"

Thomas shrugged. "Only one that I saw. There may have been more
afterward, but I turned tail the instant we were hit. It's rather
vexing, you know. I put a lot of work into that boat---it will take ages
to mend her."

One of the guards at the door cleared his throat meaningfully. "What?"
the captain barked.

"Chief Steward, *sra*. Wants to know if you'll want dinner brought
down."

"Saints. Tell her no, I'll take it upstairs as usual. And then get back
to your posts. Oh, and Eamile? No tall tales, all right? Someone fired a
siege bow at them, that's all we know."

"Yes, *sra*." The guard saluted sharply, right fist to left breast, then
spun and marched away, his two companions on his heels.

The captain sighed again. There was no point telling them not to say
anything. Half of Forecastle had seen them carry Razi, unconscious and
dripping blood, into the Hardeck. By now, half the town would be saying
that he had been attacked by griffins, gargoyles, or gaunts, while the
other half would be just as sure that he and Thomas had fought a duel on
board the magician's flying boat. He'd be dead and risen, or have
vanished in a puff of smoke. *And someone will find a way to blame the
Hett,* he thought sourly. His conversation with Klaues had gone poorly;
he'd have to get the bosun to send a few militiamen he could trust down
to the sawdust tip to make sure no one did anything stupid...

Nuu Ciy unstoppered a small black bottle and painted a few drops of
poppy tar on Razi's lips with the trimmed end of a gull's feather.
"He'll sleep until morning," she announced, re-corking the
sweet-smelling mixture. "Now, everyone out. No, you too, young man. One
of my nurses will stay with him. Out!"

Piaerre was out the door and on the Hardeck's front steps before he
realized that he had no idea what to do next. Once again, he was on his
own in the biggest town on the mountain, with a string of coins in his
pocket. This time, though, the sky was dark, and his teacher was lying
in an infirmary bed with twenty-two fresh stitches in his side. He
supposed he should go back to the Three Rabbits, but the thought of
lying alone in his room, wondering if Razi was dead yet, was unbearable.
Maybe he should go to Uncle Domaenic's instead, if he could figure out
where it was.

"Well, then." Piaerre turned as Thomas ambled down the steps behind him,
his hands in the pockets of his brocade jacket. "Quite a day, wasn't
it?"

"If you say so."

Thomas smiled indulgently. "Now, now. There's really no need for that
tone of voice."

"He could have *died!*" The angry words spilled out of Piaerre's mouth
before he knew he was going to say them aloud.

Thomas nodded. "Yes, he could have. He could have died yesterday, too,
or the day before. Would that have been my fault too?"

For a moment, all Piaerre could do was gape like a fish out of water.
"How can you---you were *there* today! You could have saved him if you
wanted to! You could have---" *You could have grabbed his hand,* he'd been
about to say. *All you had to do was reach out.*

Thomas sighed theatrically. "It escapes me, truly, why supposedly
educated people believe that magicians can just snap their fingers and
set the world right. Every spell I might have used would have cost me
far more than I was willing to give up, especially with so much mundane
help just a few steps away. Rushing around and saving people---that's not
really what magicians do, you know. That kind of thing is better left to
the booksters of this world."

"Did you tell his last apprentice that too?" Piaerre asked bitterly.

Thomas smiled. "No. No, actually, I told him that if I ever saw him
again, I'd put his eyes out with my thumbs." He nodded farewell politely
and, whistling, went on his way.

Piaerre's surge of anger dissipated, leaving him feeling cold and tired.
He bought a sausage on a stick and a strip of flat bread from a stall
that had stayed open for militiamen on the night watch, and ate them as
he walked as slowly as he could to the Three Rabbits. The bread was
stale, and the bland, gristly sausage was cold in the middle, but he
finished them anyway.

The old woman at the Three Rabbits had heard about Razi, of course, but
seemed more worried about Piaerre. "I'm fine," he assured her. "But I
hope my maere and paere hear the story straight. I mean, if someone
tells them it was me instead of him..."

"Well, there's nothing anyone can do about that tonight, is there?" she
said soothingly. "Now, are you sure you aren't hungry? There's plenty of
beans left in the pot."

"I'm fine, thank you. I think I'll just go to bed."

"All right. Oh, but wait. I almost forgot. Your little friend left this
for you. She said you dropped it in the market." The old woman took a
book from the mantelpiece and handed it to him.

Piaerre blinked. It was the collection of stories he had looked at that
afternoon. "Thank you," he said automatically. "Was it---who dropped it
off?"

The old woman raised her eyebrows. "You don't know?"

Piaerre shrugged, feeling embarrassed. "I can guess," he lied, "But, you
know, I'd hate to get it wrong."

The old woman's smile turned up at the corners. "Starboard Town must be
quite the place on holidays."

Piaerre blinked. "Excuse me?"

"Well, if every man there has as much luck as you and Uyves... I'd say she
was twelve or thirteen. Could use some new clothes, and a bath, but she
had very nice eyes."

Blushing, Piaerre thanked her again and climbed the steep stairs to his
room. The only light came from a sliver of dayglass beside the window.
It was cheap stuff, so orange that it was almost red, and didn't cast
nearly enough to read by, but he sat on his bed with the book open in
his lap anyway. It had to have been the thief. But why would she give
him a book? Unless she planned to tell the militia that he had stolen
it. He stood up, then sat down again. No, that didn't make any sense.
The old woman would tell them where it had come from.

Maybe there was a message hidden in it. He riffled its pages, then
turned it upside down and shook it. Nothing. Invisible ink? Magic
writing that would only show up when the moon was full, or if the reader
whistled *The Crosseyed Ostrich*? It could be anything.

Defeated, he wrapped the book in his spare shirt and slipped it into his
satchel, then stripped down to his underclothes and slid his skinny legs
under the quilts mounded on the bed. He would take the book back to the
bookseller tomorrow morning, right after he went to check on Razi. He
closed his eyes and tried not to think of the bookster lying on the
dock, bleeding. *It was like Fraederiq all over again,* he thought
bitterly. He had just stood there. He hugged his knees to his chest and
closed his eyes.

Sleep was a long time coming, and when it came, it brought no rest. He
was chasing Fraederiq this time, except it was really Razi. He had to
tell him something, something very important, but he didn't know what it
was, and the bookster was already on the dock, but Piaerre had to finish
copying out his verbs, pages and pages of them...

He sat up and thumped his fists on the quilts, near tears with fatigue,
fear, and frustration. If his thoughts were going to wander, why
couldn't they wander toward Chaentelle? The only time his sister's best
friend acknowledged his existence was when QueÃ§enne told her about
something stupid or unforgivably boyish Piaerre had done, but that
hadn't stopped Piaerre from noticing *her*. Especially not in the last
few months, since the mountain's berthing at Mau Ngapcha, when several
of the girls in Starboard Town had bought light cotton shirts with
lace-up collars and flowing sleeves. To Piaerre's surprise, it had been
his father, rather than his mother, who had told QueÃ§enne that she could
wear that to the Departure Eve celebration the day after he died, and
not a heartbeat before. Half-a-dozen identical conversations had taken
place up and down Slip Street, but the girls had shown up wearing them
anyway. All Piaerre had to do was close his eyes and he could see the
result: Chaentelle dancing, eyes bright, the sleeves turning her arms
into pale wings in the lamplight while bass flutes and violins turned
the night into a dark river that washed over them all...

* * *

The old woman shook him awake, squeaking with shock when he sat up
abruptly and grabbed her arm. "What? What?" he demanded, his mind still
lost in the dark maze his dreams of Chaentelle had turned into.

The room's waxed cotton window was barely gray. The dayglass next to it
had long since gone dull, but the old woman had a small brass lantern.
Lighting her face from below, it made her look like a ghost out of a
Bantangui puppet play. "I think we're berthing!" she said fearfully,
pulling her arm away. "Can't you hear it?"

"What?" The words made no sense to Piaerre. How could they be berthing?
But suddenly everything swam into focus. That crackling sound wasn't a
fire in the hearth downstairs. It was a forest being crushed to kindling
by Avaunt's belly half a gallop below. A faint shudder ran through the
bed. A moment later, thunder rumbled faintly in the distance. Piaerre's
skin felt clammy. Had they just knocked the peak off one of the
mountains below?

He flung off his quilts, heedless of being seen in just his underclothes
by the old woman. "It woke me up," she said, hugging herself inside the
oversized ankle-length coat that she was wearing over her thick white
nightdress as Piaerre struggled into his trousers. "I went downstairs to
see if it was someone trying to jemmy the door, but there was no one
there, and then everything started shaking. What's happening?"

*Why are you asking me?* Piaerre thought resentfully, even though he
knew the answer. She was asking him because she had no one else to ask.
"I don't know," he said. He pulled his right foot out of his left boot
and took a deep breath. "Do you have someone you can be with? Just in
case?"

"There's my son-by-marriage," she said uncertainly. "He's remarried now,
but he's just two streets away. But he hates fuss---I don't want to be a
fuss."

Piaerre almost laughed. He was pretty sure this wouldn't be counted as
"fussing". "I'm going up to the Hardeck," he said, knotting his laces
hastily and grabbing his satchel. "If I find out anything, I'll let you
know, all right?"

He ran through the streets of Forecastle like a rabbit with a lynx on
its tail. The streets seemed even more tangled in the dark. Twice he
thought he had lost his way, but each time he came around a corner and
found himself exactly where he should have been.

Other people were on the streets as well. Men with militia helmets in
one hand and spears or bows in the other hurried to their rallying
stations. Women with coats or blankets thrown over their nightclothes
stood in doorways or looked out of thrown-open shutters, shushing the
squalling babies in their arms as the crackling grew louder and louder,
until it sounded like a bonfire. People yelled questions at each other,
at Piaerre, at the mountain itself. Piaerre saved his breath for
running.

One last corner, and he was at the market square. It was chaos. A bald,
bearded man struggled to get through the crowd with half a dozen bags of
chocolate beans in his arms. Someone yelled, "Caeline! Caeline!" over
and over, looking for their mother or a child or a lost cat. "Watch
where you swing that!" a man in striped summer trousers and heavy boots
snarled as a clumsy militiaman's spear nearly took his ear off. It was
chaos.

The whole scene was lit by the two man-sized panes of dayglass on the
side of the Hardeck that were normally only uncovered on Yearagain Eve.
"If you've got your gear, find the rest of your squad and form up!" a
bosun's mate bellowed from between the two great lights. "If you don't,
then go and weeping get it! Hey, where do you think you're going?"

"I'm the bookster's apprentice," Piaerre panted from two steps below
him. "He's in the infirmary. I'm supposed to be with him." He started up
the steps again.

The bosun's mate planted a hand in his chest to block him. "Get off with
you." He pushed, not gently.

"Hoy!" A guardsman coming up the stairs behind Piaerre caught him before
he fell. "Go easy," he cautioned the shover. "We're not at war yet." He
looked at Piaerre. "I know you. You were with what's his name, the
fellow on the boat."

Piaerre nodded vigorously. "In the infirmary. I'm supposed to be with
him now."

The guardsman let go of his arm. "Well then, get in there." He pushed
Piaerre up the stairs, past the glowering bosun's mate.

Piaerre raced down the corridor to the infirmary, dodging through the
clerks, bosun's mates, and household staff as they all tried to organize
one another. He stopped a moment in front of the infirmary door to catch
his breath, then pushed it open as gently as he could.

"Bookster?" he said softly, closing it behind him. He felt along the
wall until he found the lamp he had seen that afternoon. Unscrewing its
cap, he held it up, squinting as his eyes adjusted to the flood of
trapped sunlight it released.

Razi lay motionless in bed, looking exactly as he had when Piaerre last
saw him. For a moment Piaerre thought he was dead, that the spells the
captain's wife had used hadn't been enough, but then Razi's fingers
twitched.

"Bookster!" he whispered loudly. "Are you awake?"

The bookster's eyes fluttered. "Eimin?" he said faintly.

"Bookster?"

"*La*, Piaerre..." Razi struggled to sit up a moment before dropping his
head back onto his pillow. "When is?"

"It's morning. Almost, anyway. You're in the infirmary, in the Hardeck.
Bookster, we're berthing!"

The bookster closed his eyes again. "And the sea shall give me over to
the land, constant and weighty," he whispered.

"Bookster, are you all right?" Piaerre sat on the edge of his teacher's
sick bed, swallowing back the panic rising in his throat. He hadn't
thought any further than finding Razi. He *had* to know what to do.

The dark man chuckled weakly. "*La*, I do not think 'all right' is the
phrase I would use. Is there water?"

There was, a pitcher on the table where Nuu Ciy's bloody bowl had stood.
Piaerre poured some into a heavy brown pottery mug and held it up
gingerly to his teacher's lips.

Razi tilted his head and sipped. "*Saad*," he said, making a face.
"There's poppy in this."

Piaerre took it from him uncertainly. "The captain's wife gave you some
last night. Do you remember what happened?"

Razi sighed raggedly. "Someone shot us. Me. From the trees. I was
leaning over the side." He slid one hand down to his side under the
quilt and winced. "*La*... She will be disappointed in me, you know. I
told her, yes, I promise, I can do a little traveling without gathering
any new scars." He tried to chuckle.

The room trembled slightly. Piaerre clutched the bedframe wide-eyed.
"What was that?" Razi said, some of his usual sharpness in his voice.

"I think it was another mountaintop."

"Another...? *Ye mashe aue*, we're berthing?" At Piaerre's nod the
bookster tried once more to sit up. Piaerre rushed forward to help him,
but the bookster fell back again before he could.

"Go," Razi said. "*La*, go. Find out what's happening, as quickly as you
can."

Piaerre nodded jerkily and ran for the door. As it banged shut, Razi dug
his fingers into the blanket that covered him, trying to gather his
strength. Something told him he would need it soon...

Piaerre took the stairs three at a time. He collided with a weeping maid
on the first landing, yelled, "Sorry!" over his shoulder, and kept
going.

The stairs shuddered. A painting fell from the wall, missing him by a
hair's width. He tripped at the top, banging his knee painfully against
the stone floor, and hobbled on.

The Grand Hall was as full as the market square. He squeezed between two
guards, ducked under a clerk's elbow as she pointed out the window, and
found himself on his knees just inches from the glass.

"Brace yourselves," the captain barked. The room shook. Someone shrieked
as Avaunt clipped another peak. For a moment Piaerre thought the red
thread running through the trees below them was blood, or lava. Then he
realized it was just the dawn reflecting off a stream.

The scene below was like something out of the Uncertain Angels' final
war. This wasn't the forest at Normous Berth, or the jungle at Mau
Ngapcha---Avaunt hadn't trimmed these trees every sixteen months. These
were a century old or more, tall and proud, but still they bent away
from the mountain, slapped down by Avaunt's enormous bow wave just
before being snapped in half.

A flock of frightened ducks burst upward from a pond as its surface
trembled. The winged pigs that had been rooting in the muck at the
pond's edge took flight a moment later, grunting and squealing, and then
the pond was gone. Deer and gaur fled in panic side by side with lions
and chameleon bears. Nests and burrows were crushed as Avaunt gouged
fresh cliffs out of solid stone. The thunder of the mountain's passage
grew louder with each passing heartbeat.

Suddenly there was silence, as the mountain cleared a ridge and the land
dropped away beneath them momentarily. "Look!" half a dozen voices
shouted needlessly. There before them, nestled in a bowl-shaped valley,
lay Tinhead, its neat streets and tidy houses looking as peaceful as a
painting in the dawn's clear light.

The captain swept his hand across the window. The scene shimmered and
re-formed. They were almost close enough now that they didn't need the
magic window, Piaerre thought dazedly. Another few minutes, and they
could have seen the soldiers without it.

And soldiers they clearly were, on the road that wound up the steep
hills standing guard behind the town, real soldiers, with polished steel
helmets on their heads, heavy packs on their backs, and swords at their
sides. Some had their shoulders against the rear ends of carts, while
others bawled silently at heavy-laden mules, but most just marched.

The captain passed his hand over the window again. There were more carts
higher up the mountain, heavier ones, with four wheels instead of two,
piled high with furniture, chickens in coops, children, a very pregnant
woman, an elderly couple dressed in the same gray wool that everyone
else was wearing. As the image swept by, Piaerre saw one boy, as
pale-skinned as a Ruudian, jump up and point straight at them. The old
man sitting beside him on the cart's plank seat turned to look back at
the mountain that was about to crush their homes. *I hope you're as
frightened as we are,* Piaerre thought grimly.

"Come on, where is it?" the captain growled. Another pass, another
scene. The gray tower they had seen the day before was now an enormous
prow of stone, twenty stories high, flat-topped and sheer-sided. The
road from town zigzagged up beside it. Three arched openings, each two
stories tall and broad enough to swallow a cart, gaped in its side.
Heavy timbers lay stacked in piles nearby, waiting, like the soldiers
crowded around it.

The room rumbled again. This time, the rumbling didn't stop. The
mountain wasn't just clipping the tops of the hills any longer. It was
down, its belly on the ground, still grinding forward, headed straight
for town.

They could see Tinhead through the plain glass windows now. Closer,
closer... Piaerre tried to imagine what it must sound like, half a gallop
below them, as the mountain dug a trench a hundred strides deep.

Suddenly a roof fell in. A house collapsed. One wall of another gave way
as the town's two cobblestoned squares rippled like blankets being
shaken.

"Bosun!" the captain barked. "Bosun!"

"*Sra*!"

The captain whirled around. "Get the birds out!" he ordered, yelling to
be heard over the thunder from below. "And send Jack, too. Tell them
we've berthed at Tinhead, and need help. Tell them!"

"Yes *sra*!" The bosun hesitated. "Tell who, *sra*?"

"Anyone! Saints in dark places, it doesn't matter, just *send them!*"

The bosun saluted, staggering and nearly falling as the floor shook
beneath him. All around Piaerre, people were yelling at each other to
stop yelling, to make way, to stand back from the window in case it
shattered, it would be a hailstorm of knives if it did, who was the
captain sending, they weren't going to stop, they were going to crash
right into the solid granite hill in front of them, saints, saints,
saints, why was this happening? Why was this happening?

Sunlight glinted off the helmets of the soldiers waiting for them. The
tower wouldn't reach as high as Forecastle, Piaerre realized. Not even
close. When the mountain berthed, they would be face to face with a
sheer cliff. Unless---

He squirmed around a shaven-headed clerk and tugged on the captain's
sleeve. "*Sra*! *Sra*!" he blurted. "The tunnels!"

"What?" The captain looked down at him. "What are you doing here?
Where's your master?"

"The tunnels!" Piaerre shouted. "That's what the tower is for. They're
going to go into the tunnels!"

The captain's gaze snapped back to the window for just an instant.
"Bosun!" he bellowed. "Where is the damned weeping bosun?" He grabbed a
clerk's arm. "Go and find him!"

Piaerre turned back to the window, clutching his satchel to his chest.
They were almost there. He could see the mountain's shadow racing toward
the town. Ten heartbeats, five... The town disappeared below the window's
lower edge. Piaerre imagined he felt an especially hard bump as Avaunt
ground Tinhead into gravel.

Suddenly the mountain slowed. People screamed. Piaerre was thrown
forward against the window, along with everyone else in the room.
Miraculously, it held. He stood up, face pressed against the glass. The
mountain had stopped. They had berthed.

* * *

Chaos ruled Forecastle for the next few minutes. Children and adults
alike cried out in terror; bosun's mates bawled for order as the
militiamen who had been drilling in the market square struggled to their
feet, tripping over one another's spears. Falling lamps shattered,
scattering shards of dayglass like burning leaves. People were thrown
down stairs, losing teeth and breaking arms. Houses with wooden walls
that could flex and bend came through the rough berthing with nothing
worse than cracked paint, but those made of brick and stone fared less
well. Lintels cracked, roofs fell in, and a whole row of warehouses on
Butterjuggle Square collapsed in on themselves. Miraculously, both the
single old man on guard, and the young lovers who had snuck in through a
rear door for some privacy, walked away with nothing worse than
scratches.

In the forest above Forecastle, though, a trio of charcoalers were
camping overnight. Too poor to afford dayglass, they had left the embers
of their fire glowing in a nest of brick-ends gathered from an abandoned
curing shed. The mountain's shudders made the coals dance. As the oldest
threw handfuls of dirt on the fire, the mountain shook again, spilling
him headlong into the red-hot embers.

Meanwhile, back in Forecastle, an angry, frightened crowd tore a shutter
off a window on Quiet Saints' Street and looted a dozen sacks of flour
before the baker used a loose cobblestone on the back of one of the
looters' heads. The man he struck made the same sound hitting the
pavement as the sack he had stolen.

Rumors scampered around like rabbits. The mountain had crushed an entire
town when it berthed. Hundreds were dead, or none, or a thousand
vengeful Hett ghosts had come to eat everyone's souls. The militia was
under attack. No, they had arrested the magician Thomas---he had stolen
the spell that kept the mountain flying, and the captain wanted his
head.

Adminst the confusion, Piaerre jostled his way downstairs and ran
pell-mell back to the infirmary. The bookster's face was drawn, but he
was sitting up. He smiled when he saw his apprentice. "*La*, once again,
history is being made, and all I want is a few quiet moments with a
night jar. Here, help me up."

Piaerre hurried to the bed, putting out a hand uncertainly. Razi waved
it away. "Just stand steady." He took hold of his apprentice's shoulder
and heaved himself to his feet.

"Are you sure you should be getting up?" Piaerre asked anxiously.

The bookster pressed his free hand against his side. "*La*, no, I am
most sure that I should not be. But I'll be all right unless *sra*
doctor finds out. Now, get me upstairs. I want to see what's happening."

They didn't even make it to the door. Nuu Ciy swept in like a tiny,
determined storm. "Back to bed," she ordered sharply as she threw open a
cupboard and began piling bandages and bamboo splints in the arms of her
two apprentices. "Now."

Razi straightened up. "*La*, and miss the excitement?"

Nuu Ciy barely glanced at him, banging the cupboard door shut and
pulling open a drawer. "All of them," she told her apprentices
brusquely, pointing at the knives and tongs that lay in polished stone
boxes. She turned back to the bookster. "Now. Or on my blood, I'll give
you a dose of poppy syrup that will keep you asleep until the world
melts away."

Razi nodded meekly in defeat. "Come," he said to Piaerre, shuffling his
feet as he turned around. "Back to prison."

Piaerre had to help Razi sit on the edge of the bed, then help him again
to lie flat. "*La*, I'm fine, I'm fine," the bookster winced.

"Well, you don't look fine," said Piaerre, secretly glad that the
captain's wife had caught them. "Do you want some water?"

"Please. *La*, wait." Razi shook his head. "Not from the jug. I need my
head clear. Get it from over there. You found us rooms? Yes? Well done.
Now, *la*, I must ask a small favor of you, and then also a large one."

Piaerre nodded, wiping the mug beside the bookster's bed with his
shirttail and re-filling it from the urn next to the door. As he did so,
he noticed a crack in the plaster above the lintel. Had that been there
before? Was the whole Hardeck going to come down on their heads?

He handed the bookster the half-full mug. "What do you want?"

Razi swallowed a sip of water and coughed weakly. "*Saad*, that hurts."
He rested the mug on his chest. "There's a black leather case with
silver stitching, and a pair of candles in a wooden box. And a silver
knife with a crystal handle. Oh, and some underclothes. I really should
put on some clean underclothes."

Piaerre hesitated. "Are those your...your meditation candles?"

"You mean, am I going to cast a spell?" Razi shook his head. "I'm afraid
not. Getting my things is just the small favor. Using them for me is the
large one."

Someone shouted in the corridor for a ladder. Someone else shouted, "Get
it yourself!" A heartbeat later a door banged shut.

Piaerre swallowed dryly. "I'm not a magician."

Razi smiled weakly. "Neither am I. The spell is in the candles, and in
the picture that's in the case. Lady Kembe paid their price when she
made them---you don't have to worry about your teeth falling out, or
having to stand on your head when you make water."

"I wasn't," Piaerre lied. "I just..." He shrugged.

Razi's eyes were tired but steady. "She needs to know, Piaerre. She
can't help us if she doesn't know what has happened."

Piaerre swallowed and nodded. He had dreamed about being a magician.
There wasn't a child who hadn't. When he was little, he had imagined
turning himself into a tiger, or an elephant, or even a whale. Later, he
had daydreamed about giving himself a giant's strength so that he could
settle the score with Fraederiq. More recently, he had wished for
invisibility, so that he could sneak into the women's bath house. He had
fought the dragon and spoken with dead kings, night after night, but had
never thought any of it might one day be real. "What do I have to do?"
he asked.

"Just light the candles and say some words. That's all. *La*, truly,
that's all." Razi closed his eyes. Suddenly, surprisingly, he chuckled.
"It's a pity I don't have anything to read. This would be a wonderful
time to catch up."

Piaerre slid his satchel off his shoulder, undid the drawstring, and
pulled out the collection of Praczny tales. "How about this?" he asked.

Razi took it from him. "*La*, where did you get this?" He turned it over
curiously, then opened it and flipped through the pages. His eyebrows
went up. "'Oh, Sieur Artan, the sun will burn out before I give my heart
to any man but you.' Piaerre, I would never have guessed your tastes
were so...purple."

Piaerre felt his ears burning. "It's for my maere and sister," he
mumbled. "I thought I could read it to them. For practice."

"*La*, yes, well..." Razi turned another page. His eyebrows went up even
higher. "Hm. You may want to read it through yourself before you try
translating it for them. You may find some of the vocabulary is
rather...advanced."

Piaerre slipped out of the infirmary and hurried along the corridor.
None of the clerks and guards he passed took any notice of him. Outside,
half of the militia in the market square had managed to form up,
spearmen and archers side by side. The rest were still milling around,
shouting for their companions or standing on tiptoe, waving to be seen.
*They don't even have proper uniforms*, Piaerre thought. The spearmen
wore vests and helmets of bootsole leather, and heavy gloves with steel
plates on the backs and fingers, but whatever had been at hand
underneath. The soldiers from Tinhead had all been wearing proper
uniforms. Their helmet had been made of steel, and their armor and
swords too.

Piaerre shook his head. Unshuttering the tiny hand lantern he'd taken
from the infirmary cupboard, he set off through Forecastle's tangled
streets.

The Sign of the Three Rabbits was locked. Piaerre thumped the inn's door
over and over again, shouting, but the old woman didn't appear. He
stepped back and looked up at the little balcony she been sitting on
when he arrived. If he could climb up there, and if that door wasn't
locked... But how was he going to get onto the balcony?

"She went to her son-by-marriage's house." Piaerre whirled around at the
voice behind him. The girl that Razi had caught was standing a few
strides away in the mouth of the narrow alley that ran between the inn
and the house beside it. "But I can show you how to get in, if you
want."

"What are you doing here?" Piaerre demanded, angry at himself for having
been startled.

The girl scowled. "That's none of your business. Now, do you want to get
in or not?"

Piaerre opened his mouth to say 'no', closed it, and instead said, "Yes.
It's really important. The bookster needs his things."

The girl nodded. "All right, I'll get them for you."

"Oh no you won't. He told *me* to get them."

The girl crossed her arms. "Fine. Go and get them, then."

Piaerre glowered at her. "Look, just tell me where her son-by-marriage
lives, and I'll go get a key."

"Uh uh." She shook her head.

"I don't have time for this," Piaerre muttered. Without thinking, he
took a step toward her. Instantly, she darted into the alley. "Wait!" he
shouted. "Wait! Come back!" He ran to the mouth of the alley. She had
vanished like a ghost at moonset.

"Great," he muttered. "Now what do I do?" He was right back where he had
started. If he put one of the big planters beside the front door on top
of the other, and stood on that... He still wouldn't be able to reach the
balcony. And anyway, how was he going to move the planter? It was half
as big as he was. *Why can't people leave ladders lying around in real
life, like they do in stories?* he thought bitterly. Or rope. Or---

The balcony door opened above him. The thief stepped out with Razi's bag
in her arms. "Can you catch?" she asked.

* * *

The guards at the Hardeck's doors waved Piaerre through. Inside, the
confusion had ripened into a purposeful hurry. What-ifs had been
replaced by orders given, clarified, countermanded, and repeated.
Piaerre flattened himself against a wall to avoid being knocked off his
feet as two clerks quickstepped a heavy teak chest along the corridor.
As he passed the main stairs, he saw half a dozen maids, some still in
their nightclothes, taking paintings off the walls and wrapping them in
canvas for storage. A single grim-faced militiaman with a spear in his
hands watched over them.

The infirmary was as busy as a tavern on Departure Eve. A pair of nurses
held a screaming clerk down while Nuu Ciy tried to get the upper and
lower halves of his shin to line up. A woman with iron-gray hair waited
stoically on the next bed. The damp cloth she held against her forehead
was red and getting redder. Two beds further on, another woman's eyes
fluttered as the poppy tar painted on her lips took her away from what a
slate tile slipping off a poorly-mended roof had done to her shoulder.

Amazingly, Razi was asleep, the book of Praczny stories open on his
chest. Piaerre set his teacher's bag on the floor and sat down gingerly
at the foot of the bed. Razi's eyes opened.

"*La*, there you are." Razi yawned. "Did you have any trouble?"

"Not really," Piaerre said. He didn't see any point how he had gotten
the bag. He had checked it, though, to make sure everything was there.
When the girl protested, Piaerre said, "You told me yourself that you're
a thief, remember?"

She had walked with him---well, beside him---most of the way back to the
Hardeck. The closer they got to the worried crowd milling about in the
market square, the edgier she became. Two streets away from the square,
she slipped away between one step and the next. If Piaerre hadn't seen
her holding Razi's bag on the balcony, he would have started wondering
if she was a ghost.

Stiff and slow, like an old man with a hangover, Razi sat up, then
stood. "Quick," he whispered loudly, using the bedpost to steady
himself, "You distract the guards. I'll make a shovel out of a feather
and an eggshell, and we'll tunnel our way to freedom."

"What?" Piaerre blinked. Had his teacher taken too much poppy tar?

Razi shook his head. "*La*, never mind. Let us escape while the
estimable doctor's attention is elsewhere, yes?"

'Escape' turned out to be as easy as walking out the door. Nuu Ciy was
busy telling the nurses to hold her patient still, damn it to darkness,
and get some more poppy into him. As far as everyone else was concerned,
if Razi was well enough to stand, then thank you for freeing up the bed.
The bookster picked up a dayglass lantern that someone had left by the
door, nodded regally at the guard hovering nearby, and said, "Come
along, then," over his shoulder to Piaerre. Just like that, they were
out in the corridor.

After one wrong turn (or maybe the bookster was doubling back to see if
anyone was following them---Piaerre never knew), Razi and his apprentice
found shelter in a narrow cubbyhole of an office. The bookster lowered
himself creakily onto the stool behind the room's battered old writing
stand.

"Tie it closed," he ordered. Piaere fastened the door shut as Razi
opened his bag and took out a cylinder of black leather as long and as
thick as his forearm. Silver stitching decorated both of its ends and
the seam on its side. A cubical wooden box, just a little too big to
hold comfortably with one hand, came next, and then the knife. Razi drew
it from its sheath. Its single-edged silver blade was as long as his
hand; the handle was a piece of crystal, worn as smooth as a pebble in a
mountain stream.

Piaerre licked his lips. All the scene needed was a skull with glowing
eyes, a black rat in a wicker cage, and a Gifted troll named Ygor
rubbing his hands together malevolently, and it could have been put on
stage. "So, what do I do?"

The first step was to take Lady Kembe's picture out of the tube and pin
it to the wall. Piaerre had expected a painting, but instead the picture
was an ink sketch on stiff white linen. The woman it showed was as bald
as Razi, round-faced and full-lipped, with shoulders like a
longshoreman's and a pair of fiery wings tattooed on her neck. She was
sitting at a plain wooden desk; a neat row of books stood watch on a
shelf behind her head, and an elaborate curlicue grill covered the
window next to it.

"That is the writing room in her house in Ossisswe," Razi said, shaking
two brass tacks out of the case and passing them to Piaerre. "The spell
only work if she is there. Luckily, *la*, she does not go out much."

Next, the candle. There were two in the box, one half the length of the
other. Piaerre instantly recognized the smell from Razi's 'meditation'
sessions. He set the shorter one on the floor in front of the picture.
"Do you want me to find some matches?"

Razi shook his head. "There's no need. If she hears us, *la*, she will
light the candle herself. Now, take the knife. You need to put three
drops of blood on the wick of the candle."

Like most doors in the Hardeck, the one behind Piaerre was padded with a
piece of felt half a thumb thick. It muffled the voices, footsteps, and
confusion outside, so that the office was as quiet as the forest in
winter---so quiet that Piaerre could hear himself breathe.

"It only has to be a scratch," Razi said gently. "You've done worse
falling out of trees."

"I know," Piaerre said. The knife was very sharp. He would probably
barely feel it. It was the idea... He took a deep breath and put the edge
of the blade against his forearm, then slumped. "I don't think I can.
I'm sorry."

"*La*, it's all right." Razi raised his palms to his apprentice. "Just
put it down. She probably isn't even there right now."

Piaerre nodded jerkily, then surprised himself and the bookster both by
drawing the knife sharply across his forearm two thumbs below his wrist.
He gasped as dark blood welled up, even though he barely felt the cut.

"What should I do with the knife?" he asked, staring a little
lightheadedly at the warm red bubble growing on his arm.

"Dip the tip in the blood," Razi commanded crisply. "Now touch it to the
wick. Good. Again. No, dip it, then touch the wick again---it has to be
three separate drops. That's right. *La*, and a third time. Good. Very
good. Now, put the knife down on the table. If you look in my bag, you
should find a roll of bandage."

Just as Piaerre handed the roll of white cotton to Razi, a tiny flame
appeared on the candle wick, and a presence enter the room. There was no
other way to describe it: Piaerre *knew* another person was there. He
looked over his shoulder at Lady Kembe's picture.

She looked back at him quizzically. "Who are you?" she asked. Her lips
didn't move---the portrait hadn't come alive, as they sometimes did in
stories---but somehow, Piaerre heard her speaking.

He swallowed dryly. "I'm Piaerre, *sra*. Piaerre Elaiene Ã© Laeuc, of
Starboard Town, on Avaunt. I'm Bookster Razi's apprentice."

Somehow, the portrait frowned without any part of it moving. The candle
flame flickered as she spoke. "Where is he? Why not does he speak with
myself himself?"

"He's here, *sra*." Piaerre gestured, not knowing whether she could see
him or not. "He was bowshot. Yesterday. In Thomas's boat. We berthed at
Tinhead an hour ago. There were soldiers waiting for us. I think they're
going into the tunnels, but I don't know for sure."

"Hold, hold." Lady Kembe raised her hands, palms toward Piaerre, echoing
the gesture Razi so often used. "Begin you from the beginning. My Razi
has been shot?"

The story of the day's events tumbled out of Piaerre. The more he
talked, the more clearly he saw her. She was older than he had first
thought, but gave the impression of great strength. She wore a simple
*deel*, like Razi's, only white instead of brown, and had heavy rings on
both of her thumbs.

By the time Piaerre finished she was drumming her fingers on her desk.
"You are certain they were truly men?" she demanded. "Those the soldiers
whom you saw?"

"Yes, *sra*." The scent of the candle was making Piaerre dizzy.

Lady Kembe frowned. "This is disquieting. Tell my Razi I will make such
inquiries as I may. Tell him also that such voices as with whom I would
usually speak have fallen into quiet. I will ask others, but that will
take some time and doing. And should Thomas return, my Razi is to let me
know immediately. *Immediately*. That braggart boy will peril us all if
he is not soon kenneled." It didn't sound like she would particularly
mind being the one to put him in his kennel.

"Yes, *sra*, I'll tell him." The room was swimming. Piaerre's head
snapped back. How could he fall asleep at a time like this? "'S there
an'thing else?"

Her expression softened slightly. "No. Tell my Razi that I shall do my
usual to mend him with such as he left here. He is not to allow himself
more injury in that time, or I shall be very cross indeed. Now, darken
the candle, and rest. You have done your name credit."

"Yes, *sra*," Piaerre repeated faintly. He almost toppled onto the
candle as he bent over to blow it out.

Lady Kembe's presence vanished with the flame. Piaerre's knees gave way.
His tongue felt as thick as a slab of raw goat, and tasted almost as
rank. "Sit, *la*, just sit on the floor," Razi told him. "It will pass."

Piaerre slid down to the cold stone floor. The rich, sweet smell of the
candle was too much for his stomach. It was like his seventh naming day,
when he snuck downstairs and ate both of the blackberry pies his mother
had baked for him, then threw up in the field behind Mamaere Mayeule's.
The whole room was going cross-eyed...

"Piaerre. Piaerre!" His eyes snapped open. Razi was holding out a small
red glass bottle. "Here, this may help. That's it. That's it. No, not
all at once, just a sip, then some more. *La*, and I will open the
window. Fresh air will help."

Piaerre did as he was told. The lemon-mint tang of whatever was in the
bottle didn't help, but the cold night air did. He filled his lungs
again and again. His stomach was still queasy, but at least he wasn't
going to throw up. He was exhausted---his arms and legs felt like they
were made of wet rags.

"Better?" Razi asked. Piaerre nodded. "*La*, it is quite something,
isn't it? The first time Lady Kembe talked to me that way, my kidnappers
had to tie me onto my camel to stop me falling off afterward."

"Too bad we don't have any camels," Piaerre said.

"*La*, believe me, you are better off without them. Now, give me your
arm, and tell me what she said."

Razi bandaged the cut on Piaerre's arm as he listened to Lady Kembe's
side of the conversation. He nodded when Piaerre repeated Lady Kembe's
comment about the 'usual voices' having gone quiet. "*La*, she thought
that might happen. The gossipy little spirits who bring her news are
frightened, though they know not of what. How's that?"

"Fine, thanks." Piaerre pulled his sleeve back down. "Does she know
what's going on?"

"No. She would tell us if she did. She is not the kind to send anyone
into battle blindfolded. *La*, don't look so worried, it is just a
figure of speech. Now, let us see if sneaking back into bed is as easy
as sneaking out. You need to sleep---we both of us do."

"Sure." Piaerre didn't need convincing. His eyelids were so heavy... "Wha'
did she mean about mending you?"

Razi shrugged, seeming almost embarrassed. "*La*, she will work a spell
to help me heal, is all."

"All the way from there? Wow." As groggy as he felt, Piaerre was still
impressed.

"*La*, well, I left some things behind to make it easier for her. Don't
worry about that now---you should sleep."

Piaerre nodded, looking again at the sketch on the wall. It was just ink
on linen once more. "Should I put it away?"

Razi shook his head. "*La*, no, I'll do it. Though I'm sure we will need
it again soon."

* * *

Greensday, Heliodor 2^nd^. The spring dawn was just a bright smudge of
gray on the eastern horizon when a condor on her way back to Forecastle
from Portside saw something move across an outcrop of granite where
nothing larger than a rabbit had ever moved before. A dozen tiny muscles
flexed in the condor's wings, spreading feathers slightly to slow her.

Sharp edges showed where one of the peaks overlooking Tinhead had
knocked a slab of rock the size of Starboard Town off Avaunt. Matching
holes, each large enough to swallow a house, stared at each other across
the gap. A dozen men were laying planks on ropes newly strung from one
side to the other, passing boards hand-to-hand, maneuvering them into
position, and tying them in place. Behind them, the condor saw armored
men ("Whole herd of 'em," she told the captain half an hour later)
standing awkwardly on the tunnel's off-angle floor, waiting to cross.

A clerk waiting on the captain overheard the condor's report. He told a
washerwoman, two militia men, and an undercook whose interest in the
clerk seemed to have cooled in recent weeks. The news spread like a
touchfire: soldiers from Tinhead were marching through the tunnels in
the mountain, right below everyone's feet. "Oxen and wagons and all,"
the clerk told the cook, disappointed that even when presented with news
as important as this, she seemed more interested in her fingernails than
in him. "Just like the captain saw before we berthed."

Piaerre was asleep in the chair beside Razi's bed when the infirmary
door flew open. The captain strode in, his wife at his side, two
guardsmen behind him. "Is he awake?" he asked brusquely as Piaerre stood
up, grabbing for the book of Praczny romances as it slid out of his lap.
Razi had been right---some of the stories were definitely not for his
maere's or his sister's ears. But he did have several new words to
investigate...

"*La*, he is now," Razi said, opening his eyes. He sat up without any
apparent difficulty. "How may I be of help?"

"The damn window won't show me what's in the tunnels," the captain said,
arms folded, mouth set. "It's like trying to look up your own nose. I
was hoping your friend Thomas might be able to sort something out, but
he's taken the wind out of here. Any chance Lady Kembe could do us a
turn?"

"*La*, I am sorry, but I have never heard of a spell for looking inside
a mountain. Although I wouldn't be surprised if Lady Kembe had one for
looking up her nose. She can be rather vain sometimes, and since she
can't use a mirror..." He settled his head back on his pillow.

"Hmph. What about you?" The captain jerked his chin at Piaerre.

Piaerre gulped. "Me, *sra*?"

"It was your grandfather that did the bonescuttle, wasn't it? That
Coriandi fellow?"

"Yes. Yes, *sra*, it was."

The captain eyed him. "Ever been in the tunnels yourself?"

Piaerre shook his head vigorously. "No, *sra*."

"Hmph. Pity. How's your belly, bookster?"

"Healing, thank you. Slowly, *la*, these things always are, but
healing." Razi raised his palms to the captain. "I owe your wife many
thanks."

Before the captain could reply, someone in the corridor shouted for him.
"In here!" he bellowed.

Heavy boots pounded on the stone floor. The militiaman who came through
the door nearly tripped over his spear as he stopped and saluted.
"Captain!" he gasped. "The well. On Scissormaker Street, *sra*.
Phaelippe saw folk in it! With helmets and swords and all!"

"Did he say how many?" The militiaman shook his head.

"Captain! Where's the captain?" Another voice in the corridor.

"I'm in here, damn it!" the captain bellowed again. He took his hat from
under his arm and jammed it firmly on his head, glaring at the winded
messenger as if everything that had happened in the past few weeks was
his fault.

More footsteps in the corridor. This time it was a clerk with a
misbuttoned jacket. "Lame Fish Stairs, *sra*," she said. "Bosun said to
tell you. He sent a couple of squads home to get some sleep, but
somebody attacked them on the way."

"What do you mean 'attacked'? And who in all five hells is 'somebody'?"

The clerk shook her head. "Bosun didn't say, *sra*. He's headed there
now with half of his men. The rest are still out in the square." She
swallowed. "Might be a good idea if you came, *sra*. No one knows what's
going on."

"Well what the hells am I supposed to do? I don't weeping know what's
going on either," the captain complained, but he was already on his way
out the door, his wife and the two militiamen behind him.

As soon as the infirmary door closed, Razi threw back his quilt. "You'll
have to help me with my sandals," he told Piaerre crisply, sitting up
and swinging his long, skinny legs off the bed. "*La*, now where
is---*ayah*." He braced one hand against the wall, blinked a few times,
and then reached for the green bottle with the sword-hilt cork that
stood waiting on the floor.

Piaerre opened his mouth to say, "You're not supposed to be up," but
thought better of it. "What can I do?" he asked instead.

The bookster took a deep breath. "Find my sandals."

It turned out that even with Lady Kembe's spell at work, Razi still
couldn't bend at the waist. "Twice around the ankle," he told Piaerre as
his kneeling apprentice tried to retie the complicated knots. "Then
*la*, twice around the calf and---that will do." As he spoke, he buckled
his belt carefully across his hips, so that the heavy green bottle hung
down from his side like a scabbard once again.

"What is that?" Piaerre asked.

"It was a present from Lady Kembe." Razi scrunched his toes to settle
his feet in his sandals. "Good enough. Now, everything else into my bag.
We may not be able to come back."

At that, Piaerre finally asked, "Bookster? What do you think is
happening?"

His teacher patted his *deel* smooth. "The same thing you do. I think
the mountain is being invaded. Now come on."

The little office they had used the previous evening lay down the
corridor to their left, but Razi turned right instead. He walked slowly
but purposefully past open doors and narrow, worn flights of stairs,
nodding at everyone he saw, but never breaking stride.

Piaerre followed him under an elaborately carved stone lintel into an
older, narrower corridor that dead-ended at a heavy wooden door. Razi
slipped a flat leather wallet out of his sleeve. Unfolded, it revealed
half a dozen odd-shaped metal picks. Two of them went into the door's
lock. A moment later it clicked. He waved Piaerre through and closed the
door behind them.

Sharp-edged sunlight poured through a barred window high on the wall
opposite the entrance. A sturdy wooden door, barely taller than Piaerre,
stood beneath it.

"Phew!" Piaerre wrinkled his nose. The shelves on all sides of the small
room were lined with night jars waiting to be carted away.

"Sh," Razi said. "Don't be so upset. I'm sure some of it is yours." He
crossed to the far wall and untied the door. It creaked open. Outside
lay a single worn gray step, and an alley barely wide enough for the
two-wheeled cart that blocked it. Razi cocked his head to one side, then
glanced over his shoulder at Piaerre and smiled. "*La*, what do you
think? Shall we take care of this until the regular man comes back?"

Piaerre scowled. "I thought the whole point of becoming a bookster was
that I wouldn't have to shovel other people's---"

*Whoomp!* The sound of the explosion hit Piaerre like a padded club.
Even as he staggered back, Razi grabbed his arm and dragged him into the
alley. In the distance, people started screaming.

"What was that? Bookster, what was that?"

"Quiet." Razi flattened himself against the wall, wincing.

"But---"

"I said *quiet*," Razi hissed. "It was banefire, *la*, what the
Bantangui called 'wizard's anger'. Now, stay behind me, and whatever you
do, do *not* drop Lady Kembe's things."

Razi edged forward on the balls of his feet. He paused at the corner,
then glanced around it and pulled his head back in one quick motion,
like an irving thrusting its beak into a pine tree to snatch a grub.

"Over there," he mouthed to Piaerre, pointing to the other side of the
alley. Piaerre tiptoed across.

From where he huddled against the wall, the alley's mouth was a narrow
window onto hell. A broad shallow pit in front of the Hardeck steps
showed where the banefire had struck. Gobbets of fire clung to the pit's
rim, red-orange and spitting sparks. Those stalls that hadn't been blown
to splinters were on fire. People ran back and forth, shouting, some
trying to help the wounded, others trying to rescue their wares, and
still others trying to knock down the stalls that were still standing so
that the fire wouldn't spread. Militia spears lay forgotten on the
cobblestones as their owners beat the insolent flames with their coats.
Piaerre saw a bosun's mate grab a militiaman's arm and yell an order.
The man shoved him away, knocking him off his feet.

*Thomas!* Piaerre suddenly thought. Anger and fear churned in his gut.
Was this the missing magician's work? Had he been in league with the
soldiers in Tinhead the whole time?

Razi caught Piaerre's eyes and shook his head. "There's nothing you can
do," he said softly, misreading Piaerre's thoughts. "Now, *la*, we must
hurry, before they seal the town." Without waiting for Piaerre's nod, he
stepped into the street and walked briskly away from the destruction.

Piaerre hesitated. What did he mean, seal the town? And shouldn't they
be trying to help? People were dying! All of a sudden he thought, *What
about Starboard Town?* Was it under attack as well? What was happening
to his maere and paere, to QueÃ§enne and Papaere Vurt?

"Piaerre!" He jumped. Razi was glaring at him from ten strides away.
"Come!"

Piaerre hurried to catch up with his teacher. Fifty strides up the
street they turned left into an alley that stank of cat. Razi slipped
the latch on a gate, ignoring the honking of the irate gander tethered
next to it, and strode across a yard filled with half-finished benches
and chairs. Piaerre had to break into a trot to keep up.

A sharp right turn brought them to another yard, filled like the first
with furniture in various stages of repair and disrepair. The pink roof
tiles told Piaerre where they were: Papaere Leau's steam baths. He had
been here with his father just before the mountain had berthed at Mau
Ngapcha. It had been the first time he'd been allowed into the grown
men's section, though he still hadn't been allowed to accept Papaere
Leau's offer of a glass of mulled cider.

"You! Stop there!" Piaerre nearly jumped out of his skin. Razi simply
halted, as if he suddenly remembering something he'd forgotten at home.
He turned around, his hand resting casually on his sword hilt.

A militiaman stepped out of his hiding place behind a half-finished
chest of drawers. "Who are you?" he demanded, his arrow pointed straight
at Razi's chest. Two more men stood up behind him, their long spears
held tightly.

Razi let go of his sword hilt and raised his palms. "I am Razibendra
uy-Ossisswe, a bookster. This is my apprentice, Piaerre Elaiene Ã© Laeuc,
from Starboard Town."

The militiaman's aim didn't waver. "You the one they shot?"

Razi nodded. "*La*, yes. Am I about to be shot again?"

"Thinking about it. What's happening back in the market?"

"It's burning. And soldiers have been seen, on Scissormaker Street and
Lame Fish Stairs."

"I told you," one of the spearmen muttered angrily.

The man with the bow ignored him. "So you're just walking away from it
all?"

Razi shrugged helplessly. "*La*, my wound is still fresh. I thought
there would be people in greater need of the sick room this night than
me, so---"

The archer's eyes widened as the spearman beside him yelled, "Look out!"
Razi grabbed Piaerre's arm and threw him down next to a broken table
lying on its side, whirling around in the same motion to face the
half-dozen armored soldiers who poured onto the street through the bath
house doors, two holding crossbows, the rest with swords in their hands.
"*Nas na forchem! Na forchem!*" the one in front yelled.

Maybe even then there was still a chance. Maybe if the militia archer
hadn't been as good, or as lucky, as he was. Maybe if the Avauntois had
spoken enough Praczny to understand that the Tinhead sergeant was
yelling, "Don't shoot them!" But then the militiaman's arrow snickered
over Piaerre's head and took the sergeant in the throat, and whatever
chances had been in that little yard flew away like frightened birds.

*Whap! Whap!* The Tinhead crossbows sounded like books being slammed
down on a table. The quarrels knocked the Avauntois archer back against
the chest of drawers, killing him instantly.

"Aaaaah!" the spearmen yelled. They charged the invaders, two frightened
men who had just seen their best friend die against twice their own
number of swords.

Metal clanked against metal. A spear clattered to the ground. A man's
terrified cry for help was suddenly cut off.

"*Yeshed nausi pra tallein!*" Razi shouted. "We take no side!"

That quickly, it was over. Piaerre scrambled to his feet, the breakfast
he hadn't eaten rising in his throat. One spearman lay dead just two
strides away. The other was thrashing on the cobblestones beside his
partner, harsh animal sounds escaping from his throat as blood spurted
out of the gash in his thigh. The two Tinhead crossbowmen had their bows
braced against their feet, and were cranking the strings back into
place.

A soldier with blood on his sword waved it at Razi and Piaerre. "*Nausi
bayian?*" he demanded.

"Stay behind me," Razi said, stepping in front of Piaerre as the Tinhead
soldiers came at them. With a smooth flourish, he drew his sword.

It came out of its bottle like silver syrup, shaping itself into a
sharp-edged whip of mercury. As Razi lunged at the nearest soldier, the
blade lengthened and thinned to stab him through the shoulder from three
strides away. Snapping it back, Razi stepped forward, turned, and
slashed a bowman. Blood spurted from the stump of the arm he had thrown
up instinctively to block the blow.

The bookster lashed out again as the three swordsmen still on their feet
closed on him. One got his sword up in time to parry a head cut. The
liquid blade rang on his like any other. He jumped back to avoid being
disemboweled by Razi's backhand, tripped, and went down.

The second soldier swung wildly at Razi's head. The bookster ducked the
blow and kicked the man's knee, cracking his sword like a whip just
thumbs from the third man's eyes. "Run!" he shouted to Piaerre. "Run!"

But someone else was shouting, "Avaunt! Avaunt!" A squad of militia
burst out of the back door of the steam baths, spears down. Razi cursed
and threw himself to the ground. Arrows whicked through the air. Piaerre
screamed in terror as they thunked into the table a handspan above his
head.

*Phweeet!* The Tinhead crossbowman who was still on his feet blew a
whistle. Piaerre scrambled over to Razi on his hands and knees. "Are
you---"

"Up," Razi gasped, digging his fingers into Piaerre's shoulder. His
blade had bunched into a blobby club. He struggled to his feet, using
Piaerre's shoulder like a drunk would use a handy tree, while swords
clanged and men shouted and died three strides away. Together, the
bookster and his apprentice stumbled back the way they had come.

"Here," Razi said twenty strides later, pushing Piaerre into a narrow
side alley and collapsing on the ground behind him. They lay there for a
moment, Piaerre panting with fear, Razi's breath rasping as he pressed
his hand against his side. When he took his hand away and looked at it,
he winced.

"Are you all right?" Piaerre asked anxiously.

"No," Razi said weakly. "I am not. It has come open again. Where is the
inn?"

"I---I don't know. I mean, I know from the Hardeck, but I don't know where
we are now."

Razi nodded. "All right. We will have to find somewhere else for the
night. Help me up." Holding Piaerre's hand so tightly that it hurt, he
somehow got back on his feet. Panting with the effort, he took hold of
the bottle hanging from his belt and pushed the blade of his sword at
it. The mercury rippled and gurgled back into its strange sheath.

*Whoomp!* Piaerre jumped as banefire rumbled behind them; the bookster's
grip tightened on his shoulder. "Sorry," Piaerre said. He walked slowly,
trying to match his teacher's uneven pace. The early morning sky was a
blinding-bright strip of blue over their heads, but the alley around
them was still dark. It was probably always dark, Piaerre thought, as
the damp cold around them crept under his shirt. He stumbled over a
loose stone, again over a board someone had thrown away, and a third
time over something spongy whose exact nature he didn't want to think
about. Razi gasped each time. "Sorry," Piaerre kept saying. "Sorry."

Finally Razi squeezed his shoulder. "Here," he said. "I can't..." He put
his back against the wall and slid down it to sit on the bare earth.

Piaerre squatted on his heels beside his teacher. "What can I do?" he
asked anxiously. "Bookster, what should I do?" He was crying. He hadn't
realized it, but he was crying.

"M'lady," Razi gasped. "Ask her..."

"Razi? Razi?" Piaerre shook the bookster's shoulder gently. "Razi, wake
up! Wake up!" Slowly, almost peacefully, Razi toppled sideways.

"Razi!" Piaerre pulled his teacher's collar open and felt for his pulse.
It was as quick and as light as a feverish child's.

When he was eight, Piaerre had hiked down to the Starboard Town's lower
goat pasture. He wasn't supposed to---it was twice as far from town as the
upper pasture, at the end of a steep path, and there were places where
one bad stumble would mean a long slide down a steep, stony hill,
followed by an even longer drop---but the boy who had been his best friend
until the day before had joined Fraederiq in taunting Piaerre that
morning, and QueÃ§enne had lost the toy dragon Papaere Vurt had made for
him out of a few scraps of leather for a Yearagain present, and Piaerre
just wanted to go as far away from everyone as he could.

He stayed in the pasture, watching the goats and muttering angrily at
the empty air, until his stomach started to rumble. As he walked back to
town, he was so sunk in self-pity that he didn't see the rabbit hole
until his foot went into it. A sudden spike of pain shot up his leg.
"Ow, ow, ow!" He pulled his foot out of the hole and tested his weight
on it. The pain was even worse.

Piaerre started to cry, but then, in a moment that stayed with him the
rest of his life, he stopped. He wasn't crying because it hurt (although
it did). He was crying because he wanted someone to pick him up and
carry him home, but that wasn't going to happen. His maere and paere
would come looking for him if he wasn't back for dinner, but that was
hours away. Crying simply wasn't going to make a difference.

So Piaerre picked himself up and started hopping up the mountain, two
steps on his good foot, one quick, limping jolt of pain on the other. It
took him half an hour to reach level ground. It was another half hour
before Donaien and Armaend heard his shouts. "Well, you're a mess,
aren't you?" Donaien said, trying to make a joke of it, while Armaend
cut a length of elbow bamboo from a nearby stand to make a crutch.

Piaerre never told anyone about his epiphany. What would he have said?
But the first time Fraederiq bloodied his nose, he remembered it. The
first time he asked a girl to dance with him at Yearagain Eve, only to
have her jeer at him, he remembered it. And in that alley, kneeling
beside the limp, prone figure of his teacher, that memory told him what
he had to do.

Piaerre took his hand from Razi's neck and wiped his eyes angrily, then
undid the laces on Razi's bag. The wooden box, the leather tube, and the
knife were all there. He opened the box and set the stub of the candle
he'd used the night before on the cobblestones beside him. Shaking Lady
Kembe's portrait from its tube, he stood up and ran his fingers along
the wall until he found cracks he could jam pins into.

And then, the knife. He couldn't bring himself to cut the hard clot of
dried blood that had formed over the previous cut. Instead, he put the
point of the knife against the soft skin on the underside of his forearm
and *pushed*.

One drop, two, three... He touched them to the candle, hoping fervently
that he hadn't missed some vital step. Wiping the blade against his
pantleg, he set it on top of Razi's bag, crossed his legs, and waited.

Lady Kembe's picture studied him. He couldn't imagine her smiling. What
if she wasn't in her room? What if she was---

*Pop!* A tiny yellow flame appeared. It cast more light than it had any
right to, filling the whole alley with a soft yellow glow.

"Again, you?" Lady Kembe's eyes narrowed. "I did think my Razi was
teaching you in books, not magic. Where finds he himself?"

Once again, Piaerre would have sworn she was there, even though her
portrait was still just a picture. "He's bleeding again. There was a
fight with some soldiers. I know, I'm sorry, start at the beginning." He
took a deep breath. "He was talking to the captain when a guard came
in..."

He told the story as quickly as he could, leaving out only the details
that would later wake him up in the middle of the night: the sound the
militia archer's arrow had made when it hit the Tinhead sergeant, the
spearman writhing on the pavement, trying to hold the wound in his leg
closed, the red end of the stump where the Tinhead soldier's hand had
been. "And now he won't wake up," he finished. "He's still breathing,
but he's bleeding again, and I can't wake him up."

Lady Kembe scowled. "Have you his materials? The knife?" Piaerre nodded.
"Good. Rest a moment where you find yourself." The picture became just a
picture again, though the candle flame still burned.

*Whoomp!* Another thud of banefire rumbled in the distance. *I forgot to
ask her about Thomas,* Piaerre thought. All of a sudden he felt
desperately lonely. What would he do if Razi died? He couldn't just
leave his teacher's body lying in an alley. There were rats around; he
could hear them scampering across the stones. He shivered. Did the
Karabandi burn their dead? Or bury them, like the Seyfertois? Did Razi
have any oaths unaccomplished? Piaerre didn't know, but the thought of
his teacher returning as a ghost stirred the queasiness in his belly.

And what was happening in Starboard Town? Saints and small stones, what
was happening to everyone he cared about? What was *going* to happen to
them?

Lady Kembe's picture came back to life. "Well and then," she grunted,
setting a heavy iron bowl down on her desk. "Have you there his knife?"

Piaerre picked up the crystal-handled blade. "Yes, ma'am."

Lady Kembe took a neat stack of white bandages out of the bowl and set
them on the table. Next came a knife identical to the one Piaerre was
holding. She closed her eyes, took a deep breath, and let it out slowly.
"Well and then," she said without opening her eyes. "Here is what is
needing done. First, lie my Razi on his back. Make certain of his arm,
that it is out of the way. Yes, as so. Good. Now, open his cloak. No,
there is in it a tie string which must be undone. It finds itself on the
inside. Higher. Yes, there. What? Oh, his self and his knots... No matter,
just you cut it. Yes, with the knife. Good. Now open his cloak... Oh my."

The wound was a thumb and a half long. It gaped and closed in time with
the bookster's panting. Crusts of old blood clung to it; more blood
oozed out as Piaerre watched.

"Do you know the depth of it? Well, we shall together discover that,
then. Now, hold the knife over the candle. Look at it carefully. Is
there on it any blood? Any dirt? Any fish scales? No? Good. Are you
wearing anything yellow? Or can you hear any person singing? Any at all,
even so faintly? Take a moment, it is of the greatest importance. You
are certain? Good. Now we are come to the hard part."

She laid her left arm across the bowl, forearm up, and hefted the knife.
"Have you the knife in your right hand? Good. Now, you must put your
other hand on the candle flame. No, not yet, not yet. Attend me." She
opened her eyes and looked straight into his. "The flame shall not cease
with burning. It shall hurt. You must be ready for that and you *must
not* pull it away once we start. Do you understand? The doing of it
would probably kill you, and might fairly leave me witless. Do you think
you can do that? Are you sure? Good. Now..." She squeezed her left hand
into a fist, took another breath, and closed her eyes. "Put your hand
over the flame."

Piaerre hesitated. "Just as you would to trap a ladybug," Lady Kembe
said calmly. "But haste. His death has near found him. It will have him
for sure if you cannot do what needs done."

Piaerre looked at Razi's drawn face. He couldn't cry for help the way
Fraederiq had. He wouldn't even if he could, Piaerre knew. He would just
look at Piaerre, patient and understanding, waiting for him to do the
right thing, in nightmare after nightmare.

Piaerre squashed his hand down on top of the candle. The flame stung
like a bee. For a moment he thought that would be all, but then the tiny
yellow fire bit into his hand like a drill bit. He clamped his teeth
together to stifle a scream, and only then realized that his right arm
had thrust the knife it was holding into the wound in Razi's side. He
couldn't feel it at all---it was moving of its own volition, probing the
wound with the knife.

"Hold!" Lady Kembe snapped. "Hold fast!" Piaerre bit down on another
scream. Saints, saints, saints, it hurt. It hurt like nothing he had
ever imagined. He dug his fingers into the candle, trying to squeeze the
pain out of his hand. *Don't let go, don't let go,* he told himself over
and over. Tears ran down his face. *Don't let go...*

His right hand slipped the knife out of the wound, sweeping the blade
back and forth over it as if spreading honey on a piece of bread. The
wound shrank as he watched, its sides joining and sealing until it had
turned into an angry red scar. The smell of burnt meat rose from his
hand. He nearly fainted when his stomach rumbled at the odor of his own
flesh being roasted.

Without warning, his right arm went limp. Whatever force had been
helping him hold the candle disappeared. He snatched his hand away and
clutched it to his chest. "I'm sorry," he moaned, rocking back and
forth. "I'm sorry, I'm sorry..."

"Hush, boy, hush, be quiet, the thing is done." He opened his eyes. The
tiny candle flame still lit the alley. The iron bowl beneath Lady
Kembe's left arm was half full of blood. The wound she had cut in her
forearm was exactly as long and as deep as Razi's had been.

She dropped her knife into the bowl with a clang and unfolded a bandage
on the table beside the bowl with her right hand. "There," she said,
laying her arm on the cloth and folding it over gash. "That should keep
him whole for a time. Now, show to me your hand."

Piaerre opened his left hand and looked down at it. Other than a smudge
of black soot, there wasn't a mark on it. He flexed his fingers.
Something felt odd...

"Hold it up as I may see it," Lady Kembe ordered impatiently. Piaerre
raised it and wiggled his fingers, realizing as he did so that he
couldn't feel them.

"Hm. Not of the best, but not of the worst, either. Some feeling should
return, if you are patient. Now, how fares he our Razi?"

Piaerre put his right hand---his good hand---on Razi's neck. The bookster's
pulse was slower, but stronger, and his breathing was more like that of
a sleeping man than a wounded deer. "He's better. What did you do?"

"Magic, of course," Lady Kembe replied shortly. She unfolded a second
bandage on her table one-handed. "You do understand the working of it, I
hope? That you never have anything for free, but must rather always pay
for it." She unwrapped her arm, dropped the first blood-soaked bandage
into the bowl, and set her arm down on the second. "Your hand and my
blood for my Razi's life." She glanced up at him. "I count it a
bargain."

"Yes, *sra*," Piaerre said. He rapped his knuckles against the ground.
Nothing---it was as if his hand was made of wood, like Papaere Vurt's
false leg.

"Be you careful with that," Lady Kembe warned. "It is not made of teak,
though it may feel such. You may easily injure it."

"Yes, *sra*," Piaerre said again. He dropped his now-mute hand into his
lap. "What do you want me to do now?"

"Wait. That is all that you can do." She glanced out her window. "It is
only just noon where you find yourself, is it? He will sleep to
nightfall, or perhaps soon thereafter, and then be weak, but able to
walk. He will find you both somewhere to hide."

Piaerre nodded miserably. He felt light-headed and nauseous. *Again*, he
thought blearily. It seemed to have been happening a lot recently.
"'right," he mumbled, almost toppling sideways.

"*Tchah*. Blow out the candle, child, and sleep. Make sure to keep you
yourself warm---you will else feel as badly come evening as he does now.
And child---thank you. You have been brave this night."

Piaerre nodded. He didn't feel brave. He felt like the world had just
used him as a night jar.

The candle flame disappeared. Even as he thought, *I should put all of
this stuff away*, he rolled onto his side and fell into a deep,
dreamless sleep.

* * *

*Years later, a young Ruudian bookster named Leif Unruhsson decided to
make that night the subject of the formal conversation the university
required of him. He spoke with hundreds of people, some for as long as
it takes to drink a polite cup of chai, others time and again over the
course of days. He even tracked down Jack, the Gifted parrot, who by
then was living in comfortable semi-retirement at the court of the Sad
Duke of Colway. Some of those conversations were quiet, almost
nostalgic; others quickly turned angry, or dissolved into tears. The
bookster nodded and scribbled through them all, untouched by those long
ago losses, until a draper with a patch over one eye undid the top two
buttons on her shirtcoat and drew out the small cloth bag that hung on a
string around her neck.*

*Wordlessly, she loosened the bag's mouth and spilled its contents on
the rickety tea-shop table. A porcelain doll's head; a puzzle piece in
the shape of a horse, its hindquarters blackened by fire; a simple oval
locket, the face and most of the gilt long gone. "It'th all tha'th
left," she said quietly. The blow or blows that had taken her eye had
left her jaw misshapen as well, unable to reach certain sounds. She
pointed at them one by one. "That wath my daughter'th. That wath my
thon'th. The fire killed them."*

*"And this one?" the bookster asked, tapping the locket gently with the
feathered end of his pen. "Whose was that?"*

*The cobbler swept them into her bag and hung it around her neck without
answering.*

*"Sra? Who did the locket belong to?"*

*"That wath mine. I won it for thinging when I wath fifteen." Her voice
was steady. "I wath going to teash my shildren to thing, but I never got
the shance."*

*Leif Unruhsson got very, very drunk that night, and spent most of the
next day sitting in front of the fireplace in the inn where he had taken
lodging, his notebooks in his lap. He later wrote, "Twice I made to
throw them into the flames. I asked myself, what use is scholarship?
What use another dry recitation of kings and wizards, wars and treaties,
poems written and legends wrought? Then I realized that what truly
matters is not describing the world, but fixing it."*

*That motto became the introduction to his conversation, which the
university duly rejected. "These are just stories," one examiner wrote
disdainfully. "Where is the erudition? Where are the allusions to prior
work?" Another scribbled, "Fireside chats with common people do not
merit a penny whistle, much less a scholar's collar and sash," on the
twelfth page, and read no further.*

*But others did, especially after Unruhsson died in a daring but doomed
attempt to steal enchanted weapons from the tomb of Janbinder the Great.
The manuscript was copied and passed from hand to hand, until three
young firebrands in Vaarda (who were later hanged, eaten by trolls, and
married off to a respectable farming family respectively) set it in
type. Lines Leif had written turned up in ballads, were quoted by
ambitious young councilors, were translated into Seyfertois and Enswer,
and thence into Karabandi and Bantangui. When Evan Prince Ensworth stood
before the Parledoux in Seyferte and said, "My lords, my ladies, we are
all Avauntois now," the assembly erupted with equal measures of applause
and abuse.*

*But that was later...*

* * *

Bluesday, Heliodor 3^rd^. The first thing Piaerre thought when he woke
up was, *I need a night jar.* The second was, *Something stinks,* and
the third, a belated *Where am I?*

He opened his eyes. He was lying in an alley. The air was cold, damp,
and heavy with the smell of apple cores and chicken bones left to rot.
Half the mortar in the brick wall beside had crumbled away with age.
Moss and yellow pinflowers grew in the gaps. Over his head, a shuttered
window stared resignedly at the blank wall two strides away.

He sat up and rubbed his bleary eyes. The left one felt odd. Suddenly
the events of the previous day came flooding back. He looked around
wildly. Razi was gone. So was Lady Kembe's picture. This wasn't even the
same alley! And---

"Hello." He whirled around. The thief girl was standing a few strides
away, her back against the wall, the book of Praczny romances in her
hands. She closed it carefully and cocked her head to one side. "You're
a sight."

"Where am I? Where's Razi?" Piaerre asked, struggling to his feet. His
vision swam. Saints, but his head hurt. And he was hungry---no, starving.

"He went to find something to eat," the girl said. "But there are
soldiers everywhere. I'm supposed to watch you in case any come this
way."

"What?" Piaerre held up his left hand. It looked the same as it always
had.

The girl nodded at his hand. "Is that from healing him?"

Piaerre nodded, flexing his fingers experimentally. He could see them
moving, but couldn't feel a thing. He tapped the palm with his right
index finger. Nothing. The meaty base of his thumb? Nothing there,
either. His wrist? Yes, he could feel that. He made a fist and squeezed
so hard that his arm trembled. There was no sensation at all.

"You did a good job. He looked fine."

"Thanks." Piaerre tried to smile. "I would have preferred to let Nuu Ciy
take care of him."

"Huh. Good thing you didn't---she'd probably just have fed him sweets and
goat tonic or something stupid."

Piaerre digested that. "Do you know where Razi went?"

She rolled her eyes. "I *said*, he went to get something to eat. But
there are soldiers everywhere. Half the market burned down, and they
knocked the dock right off the mountain, and everybody is supposed to
stay indoors. And they killed the bosun. I saw his body. And Allaere,
and the glazer, and a whole house fell down on Unlikely Street with
people inside." She bunched her shoulders inside her oversized jacket.
"Nobody knows what happened to the captain."

"What about his wife?" Piaerre asked, thinking about the magic Nuu Ciy
had worked on Razi, and about his hand.

The girl's mouth twisted. "You mean the doctor?" She shrugged as if to
say, it's no concern of mine.

Piaerre looked up. The narrow strip of sky above the alley he had awoken
in was too cloudy for him to guess the time. He slipped his hand into
his pocket. It felt naked, somehow, out in the air where everyone could
see it. "Is Razi all right?"

"Oh, he's fine. His clothes are a mess, but he looks better than you do.
He carried you here, you know. What did you do to your hand?"

"I burned it on a candle. What are you doing here, anyway?" Piaerre
asked peevishly. His head was throbbing.

The girl's expression suddenly became guarded. "What do you mean?"

"I mean, what are you doing here? First Razi catches you stealing, then
you start following me around, then you steal that book, then you break
into the inn, and now you're---"

"And now she's making sure no soldiers find you. *La*, which they
certainly will do if you don't keep your voice down."

Piaerre jumped with fright and spun around. A tired, unwashed, but very
live Razi held up a battered brass pitcher and a handful of flatbread.
"Hungry?"

As the trio washed mouthfuls of stale bread down with warm water,
Piaerre described the spell Lady Kembe had worked through him the day
before. Razi examined Piaerre's hand minutely, shaking his head. "*La*,
it seems I owe you my life."

"More like you owe Lady Kembe," Piaerre mumbled, gulping the last of
their meager meal.

"Oh, *la*, my life was hers already, many times over." Razi wiped his
hands on the hem of his *deel*.

The thief girl's eyes were as big as marbles. "Lady Kembe was *here*?"

"No," Piaerre and Razi said simultaneously, the first annoyed, the
second amused. At the crestfallen look on the girl's face, Razi added,
"If she had been here, *la*, it would not be so quiet today, I promise
you."

"Um... What day *is* it, exactly?" Piaerre asked the bookster.

"Bluesday. The third. You slept right through yesterday afternoon, and
last night as well."

"Wow." Piaerre digested the news---a full night's sleep with no bad
dreams. "What---bookster, what's happening?"

Razi sighed. "Forecastle has been taken. If there is a window left
unbroken in the Hardeck, I didn't see it. The Tinhead soldiers had the
militia pile their spears and bows in the square, then sent them home.
The captain's guards, *la*, they are in the stock pens. Or the
infirmary, or dead."

"What about Starboard Town?" Piaerre asked anxiously.

"And the captain?" the thief girl asked. "Do you know if he's all
right?"

Razi raised his palms. "*La*, I do not know."

"They're not just bandits, are they?" Piaerre asked, knowing the answer.

Razi shook his head. "Bandits don't bring their children with them. Or
their cattle. And magic powerful enough for banefire, *la*, that is not
banditry. That it politics. Now, I take it you two have met?"

Piaerre nodded guardedly. "I am Piaerre Elaiene Ã© Laeuc, of Starboard
Town," he said.

She nodded. "I know."

Piaerre waited a moment. "And you are...?"

"I'm Iseulle," she said off-handedly.

"Iseulle what?"

The girl scowled. "Just Iseulle."

Piaerre gave Razi a sour look. The bookster returned it mildly.
"Nobody's 'just' anyone," Piaerre said, exasperated. He wished his head
would stop pounding. "What's your *full* name?"

"I don't have to tell you that," she said firmly.

Piaerre bit down on his reply. Fine, let her have her little secrets. He
didn't care if she---

The bookster suddenly raised a finger to his lips. Footsteps---no,
marching. Heavy boots, marching toward the mouth of the alley. A whistle
blew, high-low-high, and was answered by others.

Razi caught Iseulle's arm as she sprinted past him, heading for the
other end of the alley before Piaerre had even digested what the sounds
meant. "Trap," the bookster mouthed, not letting go of her until she
nodded. He looked at Piaerre, who nodded too, then laced his fingers
together to make a stirrup. Tucking the Praczny storybook into her
jacket, Iseulle stepped into it. Smoothly, with no sign of the wound
that had nearly killed him the day before, Razi boosted her up to the
window. She opened the shutter and pulled herself through.

The bookster gestured with his cupped hands at Piaerre. His apprentice
shook his head. "You go ahead," he whispered bravely. "I'll distract
them."

Razi grabbed Piaerre's collar and yanked him forward. "Be a hero on your
own stage," he said quietly in Piaerre's ear. "Right now, *la*, you will
do what you are told, when you are told. Understood?" Without waiting
for an answer, he let go of Piaerre's collar and cupped his hands once
again.

The thief girl poked her head through the window above them. "There's
three of them at the end of the alley," she hissed down to Razi.

Razi didn't take his eyes off Piaerre. With a gulp, his apprentice
stepped into the stirrup of his teacher's hands. As Razi lifted him, he
straightened his knee and grabbed the window ledge. His feet scrabbled
uselessly on the bricks for a moment before he wriggled his weight
through the window and fell onto a warped plank floor crusted with
ancient bird cake.

As he rolled over and sneezed, Iseulle tossed one end of a climbing rope
out the window. The other end was already knotted around a beam. Razi
squirmed through the window a few moments later and tossed the rope end
back to Iseulle. Wordlessly, she untied the knot, coiled the rope, and
stowed it in a nondescript canvas satchel. Shouldering the bag, she
picked up a larger one that sat on the floor beside her and handed it to
Razi.

The bookster put the strap over his shoulder. "Lead the way," he told
Iseulle.

They were in an old warehouse, Piaerre discovered. The dozen crates
stacked near the stairs on the wall opposite the window they had come
through were new, but everything else looked and smelled as if it had
been there for years. Pigeons, irvings, and other birds had left years
of cake on the floor; a few bones and tufts of fur were all that
remained of an old cat that had picked the room to die in.

"Rooftops are fine in stories," Razi said in a lecturing tone. "But it's
hard not to make sounds on tile roofs, and if anyone else is higher than
you, *la*, bows are not rare things in this world, and arrows are
difficult to outrun. It is always better to move under cover." As he
spoke, he drew a workman's knife from his bag and gouged the mortar away
from some of the bricks in the wall to his left. Grabbing hold of the
thick cord that had been embedded beneath the mortar, he braced his foot
against the wall and yanked sharply. The cord went taut, pulling mortar
out of the bricks.

More gouging revealed another cord a few ranks below the first, and then
two more lying vertically. "Here," Razi said, pulling a brick free and
handing it to Piaerre. He pulled more out until he had opened up a hole
large enough to wriggle through.

"How are you going to close it up again?" Iseulle asked, admiring the
opening into the building next door as if it were a work of art.

"Why would I?" Razi asked. He gestured for Piaerre to slide through the
hole. "I'd be a fool to ever come back here."

"But what about all the stuff in the crates?" Iseulle protested.

"What stuff?" Piaerre asked, pulling his head out of the hole.

Razi ignored the question. "It would just slow us down. Right now, *la*,
the most important thing is to keep moving." He shooed Piaerre through
the hole, then Iseulle, and followed them on his hands and knees.

The second warehouse was as decrepit as the first. A flight of stairs
and a weather-beaten door took them to an enclosed yard, which in turn
connected to a tinsmith's backyard forge. The smithy's front door looked
out onto the yard behind Papaere Leau's steam baths, where Razi had
fought the soldiers the day before. Their bodies, and those of the three
Avauntois militiamen they had slain, were gone; dark stains on the
cobblestones were all that remained to show Piaerre that it had been
more than just a nightmare.

Razi halted suddenly, pressing himself against the wall, then glanced
quickly around the corner. "Soldiers," he said quietly to the two
teenagers behind him. "*Saad*."

"What does that word mean?" Iseulle whispered to Piaerre. "He uses it a
lot."

"I'll tell you when you're older," Piaerre whispered back. He was
suddenly aware of her body pressed against his, as warm as a cat. Her
hair smelled much better than a street urchin's ought to. "Now be
quiet."

"Sst!" Razi's hiss cut them both off. He jerked his chin at Iseuelle.
"Where from here?"

"There are some loose boards over the window to the pot mender's," she
answered promptly. "Her downstairs has a delivery door on Sweet Icicle
Street. It's only a couple of streets from there to the Rabbit."

Razi shook his head. "We're not going to the Rabbit. We're going
straight back to Starboard Town."

"But---" Piaerre and Iseulle said simultaneously. They stopped and looked
at one another angrily.

"But what about the rest of our things?" Piaerre asked.

Razi shook his head. "Too risky." He raised an eyebrow at Iseulle. "You
will come with us." It wasn't a question.

For the first time, the little thief seemed unsure of herself. "But...
What if..." She left the question unfinished.

Razi put his hand on her shoulder gently. "You can do nothing here.
*La*, nor can I. We can help most by making ourselves safe. Besides, did
you not say that you wanted to see some more of the world?"

She wrinkled her nose. "I didn't mean Starboard Town."

Razi smiled. "*La*, well, it may be a better place to begin than you
think. Come."

It took them half an hour---half a slow, spine-chilling, hour---to make a
journey that would have been a five-minute stroll the day before.
Forecastle was deserted. There were no *bouquinnaires* selling grilled
whole rabbits on skewers, no dyers with indigo-stained arms lugging
barrels to and fro, no children spinning Bantangui tops or playing
hide-from-your-mother on the cobblestones. The town's kites still flew,
most of them, but the tramp of marching feet, and the shrill calls of
the soldiers whistles, were all the trio heard.

Razi never hurried. When he moved, he moved quickly, darting from one
shadow to another, but he spent more time listening and waiting than he
did in motion. Piaerre felt a pang of jealousy the first time his
teacher held up a hand and made a series of quick signs that sent
Iseulle back the way they had just come. The two clearly knew each
other; he had a growing suspicion that she was his other student on the
mountain, and that she had known about him long before he had known
about her. But then why had Razi let the bosun arrest her?

Razi squatted and duck-walked through the waist-high gap beneath a
broken wooden gate. When Piaerre followed, he found the bookster pressed
against the wall, his finger across his lips. Piaerre stopped where he
was, still crouched awkwardly.

The gate stood at the top of a steep hill. Forty strides below, on the
first cross street, a troop of Tinhead soldiers was marching from
somewhere to somewhere else. A few wore bandages, or had fresh dents or
scratches on their helmets or breastplates, but only a few.

Piaerre began counting automatically. Ten... twenty... At thirty came four
soldiers with a sedan chair on their shoulders. The man sitting in the
chair wore the same gray uniform as the soldiers, but no armor or
helmet. He sat upright, hands on the chair's padded arms, staring
straight ahead, swaying only slightly as the chair rocked back and
forth. Sunlight glinted momentarily off his eyes, as if off metal, and
then he was gone.

Another ten soldiers followed. Razi waited until they were past, then
waited some more. Piaerre desperately wanted to straighten up---almost as
desperately as he wanted to empty his bladder---but he stayed where he was
until Razi signaled to keep moving.

They reached the pot mender's a few minutes later. As Piaerre squeezed
through the boarded-up window, something tugged at him. He looked down
to find a long splinter embedded in the palm of his left hand. He yanked
it out, watching blood well up with a curious sense of detachment.

"Let me see that," Razi said, setting his satchel on the floor. He took
out a red jar that looked as though it had passed through a camel at
least once and unscrewed its lid. Rolling up Piaerre's sleeve, he
scooped two fingers of something that smelled like bad cheese out of the
jar.

"Like this," he said, smearing it over Piaerre's left hand. "Work it in
gently, like oiling leather."

"Will it make the feeling come back?" Piaerre asked, massaging the
ointment into his numb skin.

Razi shook his head. "*La*, no, nothing will do that. But it will stop
your skin from going stiff and cracking."

Piaerre wrinkled his nose at the smell coming from the jar. "You have
stuff just for that?"

The bookster shrugged. "Actually, it's for cows' udders in winter."

"Oh." Piaerre digested that. "So how many places like this do you have?"

"In Forecastle?" Razi turned his hands palms-up. "Just the two you have
seen. I had some things in the Hardeck, but *la*, I do not think I will
go back for them."

"And in Starboard Town?"

The bookster seated himself on a pine box. "That should be enough. Try
to use it as much as you normally would, to keep it strong."

Piaerre let his hands fall to his sides. He was hungry, and tired, and
frightened, and the superior look on Iseulle's face wasn't helping a
damned bit. "Bookster---I said, do you have a cache like this in Starboard
Town too?"

Razi glanced at him. "Not in, no, but near. One takes precautions."

In the long, dark hours that followed, as he repeatedly squeezed and
relaxed his left hand in a vain attempt to take his mind off his
stomach, Piaerre wondered what other precautions the bookster had taken.
When he wasn't doing that, or worrying about his family, he wondered who
the invaders were, and what they wanted with Avaunt. The spices in
Forecastle's warehouses were worth several fortunes, but like Razi had
said, this wasn't banditry, this was politics. He turned the word over
in his mind. Politics... Kings and magicians and countries invading one
another... It was supposed to be something you read about. It wasn't
supposed to be something that happened to you.

The hours crawled by. The pot mender's shop smelled of clay and glue. It
wasn't much bigger than Papaere Vurt's kitchen: a counter, some shelves,
a small kiln, and a stairway so steep that it might as well be called a
ladder. Iseulle sat on the floor, slowly turning the pages of the book
of Praczny stories. Piaerre didn't know if she could read; even if she
could, there wasn't enough light, but she kept turning the pages anyway.
Razi lay on his back near Piaerre's feet, his arms behind his head,
breathing slowly and softly. There was nothing to do but wait.

And worry. Piaerre hadn't seen any signs of fire on their journey from
the warehouse, but he could smell smoke beneath the shop's clay and
glue. The market burned; the bosun dead, and maybe the captain too. What
was happening in Starboard Town, while they hid in the dark? Were his
maere and paere safe? Was Papaere Vurt? And QueÃ§enne? Was their house
still standing? Or had the invaders' banefire turned them all to ash?

Suddenly Piaerre could stand it no longer. He stood up. "We have to get
going."

"Two more hours," Razi said without moving. "It will be dark then, and
safer."

"But---"

"Two more hours," Razi repeated. He turned his head to look at Piaerre.
"Now sit down." Piaerre sat disconsolately and listened to the pages
turning slowly behind the counter.

* * *

In the end, Razi had to wake his apprentice from an uncomfortable doze.
"It's time," he said softly, shaking Piaerre's shoulder.

The bookster's bag empty lay on a shelf, neatly folded. The tube holding
Lady Kembe's picture was slung over his shoulder on a cord. The rest of
his things were hidden in the depths of his *deel*, except for his
strange sword, which hung from his belt in its green bottle, and a coil
of rope, which he wore over one shoulder and across his chest.

Iseulle poked her head up above the floor. "All clear," she whispered
loudly.

"After you. *La*, and take care with your hand." Razi stepped back to
let Piaerre go first down the steep, narrow steps.

The pot mender's shop had barely been large enough for the three of
them; its basement was even smaller. The dust mice on the steps were big
enough to deserve individual names, and gray clumps of cobweb heavy with
egg sacs hung in the corners. Piaerre kept his good right hand on the
wall to steady himself, only using his left when he had to. It was still
numb, but the wrist tingled in a way it had a few hours before.

Razi waited on the bottom stair behind Piaerre while Iseulle cracked the
delivery door open. She slipped through, paused, and then beckoned them
forward.

Sweet Icicle Street took its name from the shops at its upper end, which
Piaerre could just make out in the gathering twilight. Twice a week, on
Redsday and Greensday, Forecastle's icicleers climbed up the shoulder of
the mountain overlooking the city. There, near the peak, they scraped
hard-packed snow into their buckets, packing it down under layers of
wood chips. After sleeping for a few hours wrapped up in goat-skin rugs
to stay warm, they hiked back down to town, where they added drops of
lemon, blueberry juice, mango, and other carefully-measured flavorings
to the ice.

The icicleers were famous for their clannishness and contrariness. You
couldn't have a wedding in Forecastle without great tubs of flavored
ice---the icicleers would stand outside the banquet hall, banging on their
buckets and shouting insults. When people said, "It was as quiet as
Sweet Icicle Street," they were describing a shouting match.

But that evening, Sweet Icicle Street truly was quiet. With the mountain
at rest, there wasn't even a breeze, just the creaking of awning posts,
and the muffled bang of a shutter being closed hastily a few houses
away. Someone had seen them. *Probably several someones*, Piaerre
thought. He hoped they were Avauntois.

The sharp-sweet tang of boiled blueberries filled his nostrils as he
followed Iseulle and Piaerre into the gap between two shops. It wasn't
even an alley, just empty air where one building didn't quite rub
shoulders with the next. It ended in a blank wall, but the ground had
subsided long ago, leaving enough space between brick and cobblestone
for the trio to slip through one at a time.

The other side of the wall was a small, neatly-kept courtyard. A bamboo
lattice gate stood four strides away. Beyond it, garden sheds watched
over small patches of vegetables fenced with wicker and string to keep
out rabbits; beyond them lay pine trees. They were on the very outskirts
of Forecastle.

Even as he realized that, Piaerre heard boots matching on cobblestones.
He hurried to take shelter with Razi and Iseulle behind some aromatic
shrubs in terracotta pots. Whistles called back and forth in the street
ahead of them. Razi patted the air with his hand---keep still---and crept
silently to the gate. Ignoring his signal, Iseulle followed him. Stung,
Piaerre followed her.

"They're watching the road," Iseulle whispered beside him, pointing at a
glimmer of light escaping from the tin shutter of a lantern hanging on a
tripod between two of the sheds. Half a dozen soldiers stood beside it,
talking softly, its yellow light reflecting off their helmets.

"*La*, and if they're smart, they'll have a few more further down the
road, without lanterns," Razi muttered. "My apologies---getting back to
Starboard Town may prove more difficult than I had thought."

"What about the beanfields behind Conemongers Street?" Iseulle asked.
"We can crawl through the drainage ditches. That'll get us to the pine
orchard."

Razi cocked an eyebrow at Piaerre. "I can do it," his apprentice
whispered, nettled that his teacher thought he was the weak link.

"*La*, I'm sure, but---get back!" The bookster pulled Piaerre and Iseulle
away from the gate. Piaerre caught a glimpse of a sedan chair surrounded
by a squad of soldiers, its straight-backed occupant staring straight
ahead.

A whistle blew, high and shrill. "*Nettin ya! Nettin ya!*" The soldiers
by the lantern looked at the garden gate, startled, as one of the
soldiers beside the sedan chair shouted. They had been found.

Razi didn't need to give the order---they ran, like rats scampering away
from a cat, back to the alley and away. Panic tightened Piaerre's chest.
Razi's cache of equipment, the way he knew his way around Forecastle's
back streets and byways, even his friendship with Iseulle: whether out
of habit or because of Lady Kembe's premonitions, he had clearly planned
for the worst. But as they ran out onto Sweet Icicle Street, it was also
clear that the bookster had run out of plans.

"Psst! Over here!" Razi pulled up sharply, stumbling a step when Iseulle
ran into his back, and again when Piaerre ran into hers. A few strides
away, a door had opened a crack. A hand beckoned them urgently.

They hurried through the door. It closed behind them with a click. A
moment later, someone uncovered a tiny chip of dayglass. Two men,
worried and angry, studied them.

"*La*, please, cover it," Razi whispered urgently. "They will be
following." The light disappeared.

For a moment, the only sound was their breathing, but then Piaerre heard
the tramp of boots coming closer outside. He swallowed and closed his
eyes as the soldiers marched past without stopping.

"One blue banana, two blue bananas..." Razi counted the time under his
breath. Piaerre bit his lip to stop himself from giggling at the
nonsense words.

At twenty, Razi held his breath, then let it out in a long sigh. "Thank
you. And now, please, the light?"

A hand lifted an old brass cover to let the sunlight trapped in the
dayglass fill the room. Their rescuers were standing shoulder to
shoulder in front of the shop's plank counter. Father and son, or uncle
and nephew, they had the same unruly black beards, wore the same
determined expressions, and held matching knives in their hands.

Razi raised his palms. "We bring no hurt," he said gravely. "Just our
thanks for giving us refuge."

The older one nodded and lowered his knife, elbowing the younger to
follow suit. "You're that foreign fellow, aren't you? The one they
shot."

Razi bowed slightly. "I am. I am Razibendra uy-Ossisswe. This is my
apprentice, Piaerre Elaiene Ã© Laeuc, of your own Starboard Town. And
Iseulle, without whom I am sure we would be wearing fetters at this
moment."

"Pleased to learn your names. Now, you have any idea who these lot are?"

Razi shook his head. "*La*, we spent most of today hiding from them."

The older man grunted. "Same as us, then. They came 'round first thing
this morning, marching up and down, the one of them yelling about how
we're all to stay indoors 'til they tell us otherwise. No one on the
street, 'less they want their ears off or a sharp stick up their
backside. Couple of folk stuck their heads out their windows, tried
asking questions 'n' such, but all they got was ironmongery waved in
their faces. We been stuck here since."

Razi nodded gravely. "And what of the captain? Has there been any word
of him?"

This time the younger man answered. "Not from them, but Aivenne, he has
the shop next to us, he said the fellow th'other side of him has a view
out both ways. He saw some soldiers marching a couple of the captain's
guard up False Eel Street. Looked bloodied up, all of them, so he
figures there's still some fighting going on."

"Not that fighting did us any good last night." The older man's hand
tightened on his knife. "You figure we'd have a chance taking them one
by one? Pick 'em off?"

Razi shook his head. "No. Not with just two of you. Not even with two
hundred, I think. What they did yesterday, *la*, they have magicians
with them, powerful ones, and that 'ironmongery' you mentioned..." Razi
shrugged expressively.

"Told you it was a stupid idea," the younger man muttered.

The older man turned to him. Razi cleared his throat quickly to
forestall whatever argument was about to be reawakened. "But *la*, you
said you had spoken to your neighbor? Aivenne?"

Still glaring at his younger companion, the older man said, "Yep. The
walls here are pretty thin. Hardly there at all sometimes, if you know
what I mean."

"Oh, you mean there's a hidden door," Iseulle said dismissively.
"*Everyone* has those."

Piaerre rolled his eyes. "Well, they do," Iseulle protested. "So they
can move stuff around if the bosun comes looking on tax-day. Or in case
people in next-door shops are in love, but can't reveal it because
there'd be scandal."

"Whatever the reason," Razi said smoothly, "If we can make our way to
the end of the street without actually being *on* the street, *la*, I am
sure we would be grateful."

The younger man folded his arms. "And what then? You looking to find
your way off the mountain? Ticks off a dying camel, kind of thing?"

"We're not ticks." Piaerre was as surprised as anyone to hear himself
speak. "And Avaunt isn't dying."

"Sure isn't healthy, though, is it?" the younger man asked
belligerently. A full day in the shop with nothing to eat but
blueberries, and no one to talk to except his companion, had clearly
taken a toll on his patience. "So what are your plans?"

"We're going to Starboard Town," Piaerre said. "We'll figure out what
happens after that when we get there."

The younger man grunted. The older one set his knife on the counter,
turned, and took hold of a narrow set of shelves. With a grunt, he
pulled them away from the wall. "Careful," the older man said, reaching
past him to steady a heavy glass jar. "Don't know when we'll get more of
that."

Through the waist-high hole in the wall, a voice asked, "Huon? What's
it?"

"Nothing, Aivenne. Just folk." The older man gestured for Razi to go
through.

Aivenne, it turned out, was as nervously chattersome as Huon had been
gruff. He had a small clay oven, the back of which hung on a concealed
hinge. His neighbors, a husband and wife who needed a moment to make
themselves decent before letting the trio into their shop, used a pulley
hanging from the roof to lift a thick roll of twigs off the floor to
reveal a crawlspace, and so on.

Nine shops later, Razi, Piaerre, and Iseulle reached the end of the
chain of hidden passages. Six of the shops had been empty, their
proprietors trapped at home, rounded up, or casualties of the invasion,
but their neighbors knew which screens to slide out of the way, and
which floorboards to lift to reveal a half-basement long forgotten by
the captain's tax collectors. Everyone asked the same questions: Who
were the invaders? What had the trio seen? Was there any word of the
captain? Were people fighting back? *Should* they be fighting back? Each
time, Razi answered, "I don't know. *La*, less than you. None. No. No,
not yet."

In the last shop, a woman with long white hair tied back in a club
wished them luck. "Down the bottom of the garden," she said, pointing
through the slatted shutter she was about to open. "Don't bother trying
the gate. It hasn't opened since before my time."

"Thank you," Razi said, raising his palms.

"Pff." The woman puffed disgustedly. "You can thank me by braining one
of them when you get a chance."

The garden took them to a street that doubled back twice, then curved
around an outcropping of granite to a storage pond that had almost run
dry. The bean plants on its far side were only ankle high, but the
ditches that ran between them took Piaerre's leg up to the knee. The
bottom was squelchy with mud and rotting greenery.

"On your bellies," Razi ordered. Iseulle wrinkled her nose, but went
down on her hands and knees, then lay flat and began wriggling. Piaerre
followed her, gagging the first time his weight made a buried twig fling
a palmful of mud into his face. After the first ten strides, the mud had
worked so deeply into his shirt that Piaerre knew no amount of
laundering would save it. He found himself wishing that Lady Kembe's
spell had taken his sense of smell, rather than the feeling in his hand,
especially when that hand came down on a tiny frog made torpid by the
evening chill.

The far end of the ditch connected with a larger one built to carry
runoff to the carp pools. Beyond that, a lattice fence marked the
beanfield's far edge. The neatly-squared rows of a pine orchard waited
for them on the other side.

Piaerre cautiously raised his head to the lip of the ditch. A yellow
glow moved through the trees fifty strides to their left. Slowly, he
turned his head. No one was behind them.

"Do we run for it?" Iseulle whispered loudly.

Piaerre looked over his shoulder at Razi. The bookster nodded. "We run
for it."

Piaerre took a deep breath. "I don't suppose you know a spell for
something like this?"

Razi shook his head. "No, but I know a prayer. 'Oh Fate, be kind to me
this night, and if not, then I beg you, be distracted from me by more
important matters.' Ready?"

Piaerre nodded. Iseulle bit her lip and nodded. "Go!"

They ran. Bean plants rustled beneath them, catching at their ankles.
Ten strides--- Over the fence---

"*Hesht! Hesht aue paratte!*" The shout from behind them was punctuated
by a shrill whistle. A second whistle took up the call.

"Keep going!" Razi shouted as they reached the pines. Branches lashed
their faces. A crossbow quarrel thunked into a tree behind Piaerre.

Suddenly they were in a clearing. No, Piaerre realized, they were on a
path. He panted for breath, then yelped as Iseulle ran into him.

"Quiet!" Razi hissed. He raised his hand. The whistle sounded again.

"This way." Back into the trees they went, but quieter now, bending
branches out of their way and releasing them slowly instead of letting
them snap back into place. Piaerre had hunted rabbits this way since he
was five or six. The trick was to put your weight down a little at a
time...

They reached a rectangular patch where the trees were only waist-high.
Razi paused. The replanted cutting was thirty strides across, twice that
in length. "That way," he whispered, pointing right to keep them in the
taller trees.

Suddenly Iseulle grabbed Piaerre's sleeve. "Look!" she whispered,
pointing up.

High above their heads, the *Presumption* slipped out from behind a
cloud, her hull gleaming in the moonlight. Instinctively, Piaerre
stepped into the meager shelter of the nearest tree. The magician's
flying sloop banked slightly, disappearing again behind the clouds.

"Do you think he's looking for us?" Piaerre asked Razi, still looking
up.

Razi shook his head. "No. He is just looking. Come on."

It took them half an hour to reach the road. They saw two squad of
soldiers, one marching purposefully away from Forecastle, the other
guarding a double handful of Avauntois. The prisoners were sitting on
the ground with their hands tied behind their backs and gags in their
mouths. One was sobbing hopelessly. As they watched, a guard kicked him
in the ribs, neither gently nor viciously, to silence him. The Avauntois
toppled over, but kept weeping.

Eventually the neat rows of the pine orchard blended into unkempt
forest. "We'll rest here," Razi said, squatting on his heels. His eyes
were very white in the moonlight. "*La*, one hour, no more. Then we walk
until morning." He looked at Iseulle. "Can you stay awake for an hour?"

"Of course," she answered indignantly. Then she hesitated. "But what
should I do if soldiers find us?"

"Surrender," Razi said. He settled against a tree, and was instantly
asleep.

Piaerre sat on the ground two strides away. A root dug into his
backside. He wriggled around, then shuffled sideways to try to find a
softer spot. Finally he gave up. *At least it'll take my mind off my
hand*, he thought wearily. The tingling in his wrist had turned into an
infuriating itch.

"Hoy," he said softly, trying to take his mind off his desire to
scratch. "What *is* your real name, anyway?"

Iseulle was staring into the darkness toward the city that lay behind
them. Piaerre heard as much as saw her shake her head wordlessly.

"Suit yourself." Piaerre picked up a twig and wrote his name in the
dirt, then wiped it away and closed his eyes. Writing his name made him
think of Mamaere Mayeule, who had taught him, and every other child in
Starboard Town, the abracadabra. He hoped she was all right. She and his
papaere had been circling around one another for as long as Piaerre
could remember. "Just marry her and be done with it," Maere had told his
father, time after time, but that only made Papaere Vurt laugh.

*Papaere will fight*, Piaerre thought bleakly. Some people might not,
once they knew Forecastle had fallen, but Papaere Vurt wouldn't care
about that. He'd fight.

Piaerre looked down at the numb hand lying in his lap and wriggled his
fingers. It made his wrist itch a little less. Whatever he did, he had
to make sure he kept his hand strong. He'd never be able to use it
properly if he didn't, and if he couldn't use it properly, he wouldn't
be able to help his grandfather.

* * *

It took them a day and a half to reach Starboard Town---a day and a half
of not knowing what was happening there, or in Forecastle, or anywhere
else. Razi kept them in the trees most of the time. Whenever the only
ways forward were to venture onto the road or grow wings, they huddled
beneath the low-hanging branches of a striped cedar, as still as stones
while midges and toothworms stung them, until the bookster was satisfied
that no one else was watching too.

The worst moment came when they reached a spot where the road ran across
a broad, flat expanse of bare rock. A handful of stunted pines grew in
the cracks that seamed the rock, but they wouldn't have hidden a rabbit.

Razi studied it for a moment, then shook his head. "Too open," he
whispered. "We will go around."

Piaerre sighed wearily. 'Around' meant traversing the cliff face where
the rock dropped vertically to the forests of Praczny, three hundred
strides below. They hadn't seen or heard any Tinhead soldiers in hours,
and he was so hungry that it felt like his head was being squeezed in a
vice. "Why don't I go first?" he whispered. "If I get across, you can---"

"No." As soft as it was, Razi's voice left no room for argument. "We go
around. *La*, and now, while there's light."

Neither Piaerre nor Iseulle moved. Razi cocked his head to the side.
"Piaerre?"

His apprentice nodded, wiping his hands on his trousers to dry them.
"I'm ready."

"Iseulle?"

The thief girl looked up at him. The circles under her eyes had grown
darker by the hour. "I don't know how."

The bookster blinked. "What do you mean?"

"I mean, I don't know how," she said impatiently. "I only know how to
climb walls. That's not a wall."

Razi hunkered down beside her. "*La*, it looks like a wall to me. In
fact, it looks just like the wall at the Coral Palace, except it's gray
instead of black. Oh, and we don't have to worry about piranhakeets or
vine squid. And there aren't a hundred Thindi swordsmen chasing after
us, at least not as far as I know." He stood up, wincing as his knee
clicked. "Shall we?"

Piaerre's hands trembled slightly as he looped Razi's rope under his
armpits and knotted it. If Iseulle hadn't been there he would have told
the bookster he couldn't do it, not until he'd had some sleep, and
something to eat. He pulled the knot tight as hard as he could, wishing
he knew more ways to curse.

Later, he blamed what happened on how tired he had been. The rock was
well seamed, with lots of narrow cracks just the right size to wedge a
foot or hand into. Razi moved slowly, but without dawdling. Iseulle
concentrated so fiercely that it was a wonder she didn't go crosseyed.
And Piaerre---he kept his cheek to the rock and tried not to think of
Fraederiq.

Everything was going well until Iseulle put her hand on an outcropping
that Razi had passed over. The rock shifted, loosened by centuries of
frost and rain. Her hand shot forward toward a narrow cleft half a
stride further on---

---and the brown toadingale nesting there bit her fingers as hard as it
could. "Ow!" Iseulle pulled her hand back as the little bird shot out of
its hiding place. As she did so, her left foot slipped.

"Look out!" Even as he shouted the warning, Iseulle's weight jerked the
rope around Piaerre's chest. He dug his fingers into the rock, frozen
with sudden fear.

The rope slackened. He turned his head, scraping his cheek against the
rock. Iseulle had landed on a goat-narrow ledge three strides below.

"Are you all right?" Piaerre managed to croak.

Iseulle nodded shakily. Without a word, she started climbing once again.

When they reached the forest on the other side of the cliff, they sat
silently beneath the trees for a few moments, looking at the rich,
unfamiliar carpet of forest around the mountain, and at the jagged
horizon beyond it.

"I'm sorry," Piaerre said, thinking of the book that Razi had given him.
Was he jealous of Iseulle? Was that why he had done nothing---again? "I
didn't mean to freeze like that."

Iseulle gave him a strange look. "I didn't say you did."

"*La*, come on," Razi said, slipping the recoiled rope over his
shoulder. "Another hour, no more."

But an hour later, they heard chopping, and caught a whiff of smoke.
Cautiously, they edged forward to look.

Fifty strides below, a dozen soldiers were clearing brush from the mouth
of an old tunnel. They had hacked a path to it through the undergrowth;
as the trio watched, they stacked the brush on bonfires they had built
around the bases of half a dozen trees. Piaerre had helped his father
bring down trees the same way. It was slower than ax and saw, but a lot
less work.

The invaders worked with their helmets off, but kept their breastplates
on, and their swords and crossbows close to hand. They spoke in
monosyllables, intent on their labor.

As they watched, one of the soldiers drove his ax into a stump for
safekeeping and called out to his companions. They set their axes, saws,
and provars aside to gather in three ragged lines in front of the first
man. He spread his arms wide, then folded them across his chest and
bowed his head. The men facing him imitated him. As the sun touched the
western horizon, they began to chant in unison.

A chill ran up Piaerre's arms to his neck. "What are they doing?" he
whispered. "Is it some kind of spell?"

"*La*, I think not," the bookster replied thoughtfully. "I think they
are praying."

Piaerre blinked. "Like the Ruudians?" The invaders didn't *look*
Ruudian. Their hair was dark, not blond or golden red, and their skins
weren't pasty white like the loudspoken iron traders who visited Avaunt
at Normous Berth.

Razi nodded. "Except the Ruudians do it when the sun comes up.
Interesting..."

Iseulle tugged his sleeve impatiently. "What's 'praying'?"

"They're asking for help," Piaerre explained in a whisper. "Or guidance.
Or to be excused if they've done something bad."

Iseulle frowned at him. "Asking who?"

"The whole world, I guess," Piaerre said. The books had never been very
clear about that.

The ceremony below them ended. A few men took pans and a kettle from
their packs and started making dinner; the rest returned to chopping.
Wordlessly, the trio slipped back into the forest and continued on their
way.

They slept in turns that night, and were moving again before dawn.
Mountain streams quieted their thirst, but the early berries they
stripped off the bushes they passed weren't enough to ease the tight
ache in Piaerre's stomach, and the throbbing in his head. He grit his
teeth and told himself that he wouldn't complain until Iseulle did.

Two hours after sunrise, Razi raised his hand. "Smell that?" Piaerre
sniffed the air. Smoke: pine smoke, from a campfire, and the faint,
stomach-rumbling tang of meat cooking.

"More soldiers?" Iseulle asked. Her hair was one great tangled knot, and
she started shivering whenever they stopped for more than a few moments,
but she hadn't complained yet, not even when Piaerre slipped backward on
an awkward climb and stepped on her head.

Razi shrugged. "The easiest way to know is to look."

Slowly, carefully, they made their way through the trees, stepping over
or around salal bushes and easing branches back into place behind them.
As quiet as they were, when they caught sight of the campfire, there was
no one in sight.

"*La*, not soldiers," Razi said, scuffing dirt onto the fire as he
scanned the trees around them. "Perhaps some Hett. They may not even
know the mountain has been invaded."

"Can you tell which way they went?" Iseulle asked.

"*La*, if we were in the desert, and I had sand to read, but not here."

"There were three of them," Piaerre said, pointing at the ground and
tracing a path into the trees. "The first one had a limp. The second one
was left-handed, and was carrying most of their gear. The third one was
younger---no more than twelve. Oh, and the one with the limp? He was blind
in one eye, too."

Iseulle goggled at him. Razi's eyebrows rose into the middle of his
forehead. "Truly?"

Piaerre shrugged, suddenly embarrassed. "No, I was just making that up.
Let's keep going."

Just then, something rustled in the bushes behind Razi. The bookster
threw himself to one side, whipping out his sword as Iseulle grabbed
Piaerre's sleeve and pulled him the other way.

"It's me, it's just me," a familiar voice said shakily. Arms raised, a
battered-looking Vaszlav stepped into the clearing.

Razi poured his blade back into its sheath. "*La*, and what is it that
has happened to you? Is this Gaeston's doing?" The tinker's face was
bruised, his clothes dirty and torn. A rough splint bound three fingers
of his right hand together.

"No." The tinker seemed close to tears, whether from shame or
frustration or relief, Piaerre couldn't tell. "It was them. The Hett."

"What!?" The three fugitives said simultaneously.

"The ones in the helmets," Vaszlav said bitterly. "They're Hett."

His story tumbled out of him while Razi fashioned a fresh splint for his
hand. He'd been camping by the Porcupine, the little stream that marked
the half-way point between Forecastle and Starboard Town. His family was
supposed to join him there, but they hadn't. He didn't know where they
were. He hoped they were all right.

Then the soldiers came out of the old tunnels. They were Hett, no doubt
about that. They all wore homestones, every single one of them. "They
asked me why I didn't have one," he said bitterly. "I told them I'd
never seen the point. That's when they started yelling at me." Yelling
had turned to shoving; shoving had turned to blows. How dare he call
himself Hett? How dare he stand by while *real* Hett gave their lives to
reclaim their rightful home? How dare he *collaborate* with the very
people who had stolen it from them? The Great Work was beginning---whose
side was he going to be on?

"I said I didn't know anything about any great work," he finished, worn
out by his own story. "So they gave me one last kick in the backside and
sent me on my way. Told me to make sure I stayed downwind of them so I
wouldn't stink up their ceremony."

Razi tied a final knot in the splint on Vaszlav's hand. "*La*, this
ceremony, is that what their great work is?"

The Hett shrugged. "I don't know. Maybe. I watched what I could. They
stood like this." He folded his arms across his chest and bowed his head
for a moment.

"Just like the ones we saw," Piaerre said.

The bookster nodded. "Your family," he asked Vaszlav. "Do you know where
they would have gone?"

"Maybe," Vaszlav replied guardedly. "Why?"

Razi raised his palms in a desert shrug. "*La*, I only ask. We are
returning to Starboard Town. You would be welcome to join us."

Vaszlav snorted. "Why? So I can have my other eye blackened? No thanks."
He nodded to the bookster, then to Piaerre. "Say hello to your papaere,
will you? He was always a decent fellow." With no more goodbye than
that, he turned and walked away.

"What do you think will happen to him?" Iseulle asked.

"*La*, nothing that hasn't already, I think," the bookster said sadly.
He turned to Iseulle.

* * *

Redsday, Heliodor 5^th^. Two days after fleeing Forecastle, they reached
the goat pasture above Starboard Town. The goats watched them pass from
the security of their fenced-in enclosure, as indifferent to the
invasion as they were to the fat gray clouds threatening rain overhead.

Razi stopped them with a raised hand. "Is there any other way into
town?"

Piaerre shook his head. "Not unless you can fly." He hesitated. "You
can't, can you?"

Razi smiled wryly. "Sadly, no. So the front door it shall be. But *la*,
let us not bring too many gifts to the banquet." He handed Piaerre the
leather case containing Lady Kembe's portrait, then undid his belt and
unslung his strange sword. Crouching down, he beckoned to Iseulle. "On
my shoulders," he ordered. "No, standing, not sitting. I'll steady you."

With a hand around each of her ankles, he slowly stood up. Iseulle
grabbed a nearby branch to keep her balance. "Good, now, do you see the
cleft in the tree, just above your head? Yes? Good. Piaerre, pass me the
case. Can you wedge it in? *La*, no, higher than that. Don't be so
gentle, it isn't silk. Good. Now my sword. This you can be gentle
with---we're a thousand gallops and a hundred years away from anyone who
could make another like it."

"It keeps slipping," Iseulle said. Her legs trembled as she struggled to
keep her balance.

"Undo the strap on the picture case," Piaerre suggested. "Put it through
the bottle's handles like a belt."

Iseulle jumped lightly down off Razi's shoulders a few moments later.
"Now what?"

"Now we look around," the bookster replied. "To be sure we can find this
place again when we need to."

Piaerre looked at the tree, then down the mountain, then back the way
they had come. The creeping vine he had noticed on the way to Forecastle
three weeks earlier (three weeks? had it really been just three weeks?)
still hung from its nest on the cliff that formed the pasture's back
wall, but it wouldn't survive more than another month or two. The fence
around the front of the pasture was a better landmark. That, and the
notch where the road came over the mountain's shoulder, and the
bent-over tree where Fraederiq had built a fort, all those years ago... He
wiped his eyes, glad that Iseulle was facing the other way. He was home.

The Starboard Town militia ambushed them five hundred strides later,
where the road squeezed past the remains of a long-ago landslide. "Halt
there!" Bosun Uyves bellowed. Three archers rose out of the bushes to
their left, while the bosun and two spearmen stepped onto the path in
front of them.

"Piaerre!" Laeuc dropped his spear and rushed forward. Father and son
hugged one another. "Oh, lad, your mother's been so worried. What
happened?"

"That's what we'd all like to know," the bosun growled. He waved at the
archers, who relaxed and unstrung their arrows. "What in five hells has
been happening in Forecastle?" He frowned suddenly at Iseulle. "Don't I
know you, young lady?"

Piaerre told their story quickly. He left out Razi's magic sword, and
the fact that he'd spoken to Lady Kembe---those parts already seemed like
a dream. Even so, the words coming out of his mouth sounded like a story
from the book Iseulle had stolen for him: the destruction of Tinhead,
the soldiers, the banefire that had burned Forecastle market to the
ground, and then, their discovery that the invaders were Hett.

"Get away," the bosun said disbelievingly. "The Hett couldn't do
something like this. They're not soldiers."

"*La*, these ones are," Razi replied. "And good ones, too."

The bosun spat into the bushes. "Looks like I owe Gaeston and Marq an
apology. What about the captain?"

The bookster spread his hands. "*La*, we do not know. Taken, or slain,
or in hiding."

"Aye, that's what Jack said." The bosun eyed Iseulle. Tired as she was,
she met his stare with a belligerent one of her own. "My papaere used to
tell me stories when I was little, about how one day the Hett would come
to take the mountain back."

The bookster raised his palms. "It would seem your papaere was a wise
man."

"Not hardly. How long d'you think before they get here?"

"I don't know. But when they come, *la*, I do not think there will be
much you can do."

"That's our concern, thank you," the bosun replied brusquely. "Now, go
get some rest. And you, girl. Stay out of trouble."

"Yes, *sra*." Iseulle muttered.

As the travelers turned to go, the bosun clapped Laeuc on the shoulder.
"Best you go with him, I suppose. Make sure he gets home and all."

"Thanks, Uyves," Laeuc said.

"And Laeuc? Next time, don't just drop your spear, all right? Sets a bad
example."

"Yes, bosun." Laeuc hurried after his son.

Behind him, Uyves took a big breath and let it out with a whoosh. "All
right, you lot, back where you were. From the sounds of things, the next
folk down this road won't be so friendly."

People working in the fields ran to meet them as they trudged down the
mountain. Piaerre's mother almost cracked his ribs hugging him, then
surprised herself and everyone else by hugging the bookster and Iseulle
as well. Piaerre started to tell their story again, but it came out
jumbled. All he could think was, since when has my mother had gray
hairs? And when did she *shrink*?

Mamaere Mayeule took one look at Iseulle and dragged her away. "Have you
*ever* had a bath?" Piaerre heard her ask. The next thing he knew, he
was home. His mother stripped his filthy clothes off him as if he were a
baby, and sent him stumbling upstairs to find fresh ones.

Vurt and QueÃ§enne were waiting for him when he came downstairs, along
with a pot of reheated stew. After hugging them, Piaerre dropped himself
onto a stool and began gulping down mouthfuls of steaming squash,
talking around it as coherently as he could. It burned his lips, but he
didn't care.

"Easy," his grandfather eventually said, nodding a thank you to Elaiene
as she handed him a mug of tea. "You'll bring it all back up if you eat
too quickly."

Piaerre nodded, sucking air into his mouth to cool its contents as his
grandfather quickly filled him in on what had happened while he had been
away. There had been a small rockslide when the mountain berthed---nobody
had been hurt, but it had made kindling out of the shearing shed above
the goat pasture. A few house beams had cracked or skewed; some crockery
had been broken, as has Mamaere Mayeule's favorite dayglass lantern.

It had been the final straw for some people. They should get off the
mountain while they had the chance, they argued---everyone should. The
bosun said, "No!" in an ever-louder voice, finally making it an order,
but it was no use. On the second night after they berthed, eight entire
families packed up their clothes and valuables and climbed down past
Papaere Vurt's cottage into the forest.

Niquolas had been with them. "Knocked on my door to say goodbye," Vurt
said, fishing inside his pockets. "Just before sunup. Gave me a couple
of notes to pass on to you and your sister. Here." He passed a folded
scrap of rough paper to his grandson.

The writing was blocky and awkward. "The coconuts are under the boards
in the drying shed I bet they really are worth a lot you will see you
can keep it all Niq." He had signed it with an elaborate curlicued 'N'
that took up a quarter of the page.

Piaerre swallowed the lump that had formed in his throat. "What did
QueÃ§enne's say?"

"None of your business," his grandfather said shortly.

Piaerre finished his meal in silence. As his mother took his bowl from
the table, he said, "Papaere? What are you going to do when the soldiers
come?"

His mother was behind him, so he didn't see her freeze, but his
grandfather did. "Don't know," Vurt said. "Worry about that when they
get here."

Piaerre yawned. "I just wanted to say, whatever you do, I'll help. I'm
going to bed now." He stood, endured another hug from his mother without
protest, let his grandfather clap him on the shoulder, trudged upstairs,
opened his door, and closed it without going in.

"Well?" his mother asked below. Piaerre could practically hear her
folding her arms. "What *are* you going to do?"

"Depends," Vurt answered.

"On?"

"What these fellows want. How long they plan on staying. How nasty they
are. How many others do more than just talk." Vurt cleared his throat.
"Could be none of them do, you know. Could be this story's already
over."

"Somebody will do something," Elaiene said bitterly. "Somebody always
does."

As quietly as he could, Piaerre opened his door once more, lay down on
his bed, and was instantly asleep.

* * *

Yellowsday, Heliodor 6^th^. Starboard Town's last morning of freedom
dawned taut with tension. The clouds had moved on without raining,
leaving the air close and oppressive. People worked in the fields, or
sat on stools outside their front doors mending shirts and plaiting
bamboo, but it was different from other days. Everyone spoke in low,
hushed voices, as if waiting for news from a death bed.

Finally Gaeston exploded. "Everyone's acting like it's all over!" He was
ankle deep in wet soil, a hoe in his hand. His spear leaned against the
waist-high terrace wall two strides away. "This is our home! Damned if
I'm going to lie down and let them take it!"

"So what're you going to do?" Marq asked. The bandages around his broken
jaw made him look like a festival clown.

Gaeston glanced around. "Traps," he confided, lowering his voice. "We
set traps everywhere. Forecastle Road, here in town---everywhere. Take the
sons of chocolate merchants one at a time, even things up a little."

"Only traps I know how to make are rabbit traps." Marq sucked the spit
in his mouth into a ball and spat. "These are pretty big rabbits."

Gaeston growled in disgust. "You're as bad as the rest of them." He
attacked the dark soil with his hoe, muttering under his breath.

At that exact moment, the bosun was downing a mug of the strongest tea
he had ever had in his life. He and Vurt were sitting behind Mamaere
Mayeule's, looking down at the unmoving forest, their fleece jackets
open to let the morning sun warm their chests.

"A couple of hours, I guess," Vurt finally said, setting his mug down.
Mayeule was inside, working her own brand of magic with garlic sausages,
dried apricots, eggs, and potato bread. "Want me to start checking?"

The bosun nodded heavily. "Best do. Thanks." He stood up as Mayeule came
out with the teapot. "Oh, no thank you. That last will keep me going all
day." He ducked his head to her, as if he was still a ten-year-old
struggling with his letters in the hopes of getting a smile from the
teacher he'd fallen in love with, and left them alone.

"He wants you to put the ladder back?" she asked Vurt.

He nodded. "Quick as I can. Just in case." He sipped his tea. "Didn't
know he knew about it."

Mayeule smiled. "Whole town knows about it, old man." Which they both
knew was an exaggeration, but he smiled anyway. Vurt's "ladder" was a
chain of climbing anchors, cleverly concealed loops of rope, and sturdy
bamboo rungs that ran from his verandah down to the base of the
mountain. A goat couldn't have climbed it, but a man could---even a
one-legged man, if he was patient and careful, and as a matter of
principle didn't want to pay the captain's duty on a pack full of
Bantangui spices. Each time the mountain berthed, Vurt reassembled the
top fifty strides of his private connection to the world below and
visited like-minded businessmen on the ground below. He told himself
that he did it to set a little aside for his grandchildren. When the
moon was dark---when he missed his dead wife the most---he admitted to
himself that he really did it because he'd never really believed the
mountain would keep flying.

He squeezed Mayeule's hand. "I'd best be about it, then."

She smiled. "Best had." And best to keep it to themselves, they both
thought. Best if the town didn't know that the bosun wanted a back door.

Back in the fields, QueÃ§enne and Chaentelle were weeding beans and
talking about places to hide. "Not the cellar," QueÃ§enne objected,
tossing a fistful of uprooted ackermed into the bucket Matthieu was
holding. "Jack said they live in the tunnels. They'd find us underground
as quick as anything."

Chaentelle shivered. QueÃ§enne would never admit that she had anything in
common with her younger brother, but her imagination could be as fertile
as Piaerre's. Once she had started speculating what a band of Hett might
do to a couple of pretty Avauntois girls, there had been no stopping
her. "But they'll be in the forest, too," Chaentelle said. "My paere
said we ought to all hide in the attic. If we pull the ladder up, and
don't make any noise, they might not think to look."

"The attic? Where we used to play princesses?" QueÃ§enne shook her head.
"You can't even stand up there. And what if they set fires? You'd be
like sausages in an oven."

Suddenly Chaentelle started to cry. "What's wrong?" Matthieu asked
anxiously. "Did I do something bad again?"

"No, no, sh, no, you didn't do anything bad," Chaentelle said, waving
her half-brother away and wiping at her tears. "I'm just scared."

"I'm scared too," Matthieu said, child's eyes in a grown man's face,
child's fear in a grown man's voice. "I don't want to hide."

"Don't worry," QueÃ§enne said, suddenly ashamed of herself. "I'm sure we
won't have to, not really." She didn't tell her friend how she had lain
in bed the night before last, curled up into a ball, pressing her face
into the pillow so that her maere and paere wouldn't hear her sobbing.
What if Piaerre was dead? What if he had been stabbed, or crushed, or
burned? She had tried to push her thoughts away, but they kept creeping
back into her mind like mischievous baby trolls. She couldn't remember
him being born---she had only been two and a half---but she remembered
reading him stories, or pretending to, when she was just learning her
letters. She remembered giving him a piggyback ride home the day he
stepped on a bee, and how he spent a whole day cleaning Mamaere
Mayeule's garden shed so that he could buy a blue ribbon for her tenth
birthday.

She hugged Chaentelle impulsively. "Shush," she said softly, as she
would to a newborn baby. "It'll be all right. You'll see."

Chaentelle nodded. "I know. I just---"

"It's them! The soldiers! They're here!" The shouts came from the
terraces above them.

The two girls gasped. "Oh please," Chaentelle whispered. "Please,
please, don't let anything bad happen."

The invaders marched down Forecastle Road in two columns, their helmets
gleaming in the sun. Each man wore a steel breastplate, and had a
workaday steel sword belted around his waist. They were clean-shaven,
and unremarkable: light-skinned, light-eyed, dark-haired, neither tall
nor short. Their heavy boots made a *tramp, tramp, tramp* Starboard Town
had never heard before.

Bosun Uyves and five others walked in their midst, their hands tied
behind them. They were joined in pairs by ropes tied around their necks,
so that if one tried to run, or fell, he would drag his partner down
with him. Their mouths were gagged with identical lengths of plain gray
cotton. Afterward, that was what people remembered---that the invaders had
planned so carefully that they had even remembered to bring gags.

As the soldiers approached the upper fields, some people ran for town.
Others just watched, their hearts echoing the shame and anger written on
the bosun's face. There would be no battle for Starboard Town.

Laeuc lay his hoe down on top of his earthing bucket and hopped over the
fence into the neighboring field. "What are you planning to do with
that?" he asked conversationally.

Alone among the Avauntois, Gaeston had picked up his spear. He shook his
head wordlessly at his friend's question. "Come on, put it down," Laeuc
said. "Not here, not now, there's nothing you can do. Come on, put it
down." Gently, as if coaxing a sick goat into a pen, Laeuc took the
weapon from Gaeston's hands and dropped it in the furrow at his feet.
That done, he clasped his hands together behind his back, squeezing them
to stop them shaking.

The shouting woke Piaerre. He threw back his quilt and stood up. The
world swam for a moment. Suddenly light-headed, he grabbed the nearest
bedpost. His mouth was clammy with the remains of stew he had wolfed
down the night before. And he really, really needed a night jar...

"Piaerre? Piaerre, the soldiers are here!" His mother hurried up the
stairs and banged on his door.

Piaerre dug sticky grit out of the corners of his eyes. "Where are my
clothes? Where's Razi?"

Elaiene opened his door. "I put them in the wash tub. You'll have to
wear your others."

Piaerre pulled his clothes box out from under his bed. "Where's Razi?
And Iseulle---the girl who came with us?"

"I know what her name is. She's at Mayeule's. I don't know where Razi
is. Maybe you should just stay here for now."

"I'm all right, maere, really. But I have to find Razi." He pulled his
good shirt on awkwardly, not bothering to lace it up, then fumbled with
the fly buttons on his pants. He had discovered that it was hard to do
small things when he couldn't feel half his fingers. *Guess I'll never
be a jeweler now*, he thought giddily, his mind still cobwebbed with the
remains of his nightmares. It had been Iseulle falling this time instead
of Fraederiq, her arms and legs windmilling...

"Hold on." Elaiene stepped over to her son, scowling at him when he
tried to block her hands. "Oh, stop fussing. I've changed your diaper, I
can do up your pants." She fastened the three buttons, tugged the laces
on his shirt tight. He brushed the shirt flat. It had hung past his
knees when she bought it for him in Mau Ngapcha just a few months ago;
it almost fit him now. And his good pants only needed one small turn-up
at the cuffs.

"Where did paere put my boots?" he asked.

"I don't know." Elaiene followed him down the stairs. "Piaerre, where
are you going?"

"I told you, I have to find Razi. He's the only one who speaks enough
Praczny to talk to them." He veered into the kitchen. "Is there any
bread left?"

"Just the heel. Take it. I'll make some more later." *If I can*, she
added mentally.

Piaerre's boots stank---a few hours in front of the brick stove at the
heart of the kitchen wasn't nearly enough to make up for three days of
constant use. He pulled them on anyway, bringing his knees up to his
chest in turn so that he could reach the laces, just as he had since he
was a child.

The light outside dazzled him for a moment. He bit a mouthful off the
blunt slab of bread he had taken and shoved the rest into his pocket.
Here and there on the street, people peered out from behind half-open
doors. "Go back inside!" the man across the way hissed. "The soldiers
are here!"

"I know." Piaerre hurried up the street to Mayeule's.

Razi wasn't there. Neither was Mayeule. "Hello?" he called. His voice
echoed slightly in the main room. He shivered suddenly. He felt like a
ghost, alone after death in a world empty of everyone except him.

Halfway up Slip Street, he ran into a crowd of townspeople hurrying the
other way. Donaien grabbed his arm. "The soldiers said we're all to stay
in our houses until they call for us," he said urgently.

Piaerre shook him off. "I have to find Razi." He dodged through the
crowd.

"Piaerre!"

"I'm looking for Razi!" Piaerre shouted over his shoulder, just as he
ran straight into a soldier's armoed chest.

"Ooph!" Piaerre stumbled back a step. Behind the soldier was another,
and another; behind them, the bosun and five other men stood sullen and
silent, roped together at the neck.

The soldier he had run into eyed him coldly. "Go home," he said in
badly-accented Avauntois.

Piaerre spread his hands and tried to smile. "I'm sorry, but I'm looking
for my teacher. I have to---"

"Go home!" the soldier repeated, waving Piaerre back down the street.

Piaerre shook his head. "You don't understand. I---"

The soldier put his hand on his sword's hilt. "Go home!" This time, it
was a growl.

Piaerre swallowed hard. "*Inesh Praczny pertakken.*" He hoped that was
right. "I speak a little Praczny."

The soldier's eyes narrowed. "*Pertakka arapche be keprelaptekete
arjo?*"

"Um, *ve nesse arja me.*" Piaerre shrugged. "My teacher speaks it
better, though. I'm trying to find him. My... teacher..." he repeated
slowly. "*Saad*, what's the word for teacher?"

The soldier shook his head. "*Nauesh be koln pertakken.*" I don't speak
your language. He whistled sharply through his teeth, two quick notes
high and low.

"*Hara?*" A soldier a few paces away strode over to join them.

The first soldier pointed at Piaerre. "*Arap be Praczny pertakken in
pidje.*"

The newcomer nodded gravely. "Yes, I know." It was Jaromir.

A black eye, a scab on the bridge of his nose, and two stitches in his
upper lip still showed where Marq and Gaeston had beaten him. Instead of
his usual patchwork coat, however, he wore a plain gray uniform with two
broad ribbons tied around his right bicep.

He nodded to Piaerre. "Good morning."

Piaerre's mouth worked for a moment. "What are *you* doing here?"

The Hett studied him for a moment, then quietly said, "Go ahead, finish
your sentence."

"What?"

Jaromir tsk'd. "I think you meant to say, what are you doing here,
**sra**. Didn't you?"

Piaerre stared at him. *Sra*? Nobody called a Hett '*sra*', not unless
they were mocking drunk. But Jaromir plainly wasn't just a Hett any
more. He was a man with a uniform and a sword, and his stony look showed
what he thought of Piaerre's silence.

"Yes, *sra*." Piaerre switched back to Praczny, thinking furiously to
construct his next sentence. "I is---am---apprentice for language. Trade
also. I learn Praczny, Seyfertois, read and write, Bantangui also, then
Ruudian also."

Jaromir grunted. "Good. So where's your teacher?"

"*La*, I am here, honored *sra*."

Piaerre felt a flash of spiteful satisfaction as Jaromir started and
spun around. The bookster closed the gate to the Captain's House behind
him and bowed gracefully. He gave no sign that he had slept rough the
last two nights, or that he had been close to death before that.

"Bookster." Jaromir nodded a stiff reply to Razi's bow. "I am glad to
see you well. Some very important people have been worried about you."

The bookster raised his eyebrows. "*La*, I am honored. I wasn't aware
that any important people even knew of me."

Once again, Jaromir tsk'd. "Come now, bookster, no fencing. Not with me.
There aren't very many Karabandi on the mountain. Nor are there many
magicians in the world who could make a quicksilver sword." He held out
his hand. "Give it to me."

Razi raised his palms apologetically. "*La*, captain, I have no such
sword. Truly."

The corner of Jaromir's mouth twitched. He lowered his hand. "It's
lieutenant, bookster, not captain. A captain would have three ribbons.
But I'm sure you know that. Just as you know that if your mistress were
not who she is, I'd have your back broken here and now for what you
did."

Piaerre held his breath as Razi lowered his hands as well. "I have no
mistress, lieutenant. And I swear by my blood, I do not think I have
done anything recently to merit a broken back."

"You killed six people!" Jaromir snapped. "Or are you like this lot? Do
you not count us as people?" He waved at Piaerre.

The bookster didn't flinch. "I count all men my brothers, lieutenant. I
would grieve to kill a brother."

One of the soldiers behind him said something in Praczny too quickly for
Piaerre to follow. Jaromir shook his head. "*Nesh*. We have orders. For
which *you* should be grateful," he added to Razi, his tone level once
again. "We are to send foreigners to Hepje Het as soon as possible for
disembarking. Ordinary Burak here will help you collect your things." He
jerked a thumb at the soldier who had spoken.

"Ah." Razi raised his eyebrows. "And who, if it is permitted to ask, is
Hepje Het?"

Jaromir---Lieutenant Jaromir, Piaerre corrected himself---finally smiled.
"Not who, where. Hepje Het is the big town forward." He waved a hand to
take in the houses around them. "This is Anapje Het."

Razi blinked. "*La*, truly? I have heard it called Starboard Town." He
gave the name in Avauntois.

The lieutenant shook his head. "No. It is Anapje Het. It has always been
Anapje Het. What these people call it no longer matters."

"*La*, truly?" Razi repeated softly.

"Truly. None of this matters any more." Lieutenant Jaromir waved a hand
to take in Starboard Town, the mountain, and possibly the whole world.
There was no doubt in his voice, no irony, just a steely, steady
certainty that *knew* the world would bend before it.

Whatever reply bookster might have given was cut off by a sharp
three-tone whistle. The small knot of soldiers behind Lieutenant Jaromir
instantly drew their swords. "*Hurtiyet!*" someone shouted, "Catch him!"
Piaerre whirled around, crying out as Razi pulled him out of the way.

Bosun Uyves's escape was short-lived. Roaring like bulls, he and the man
he was tied to slammed into the first soldier, knocking him to the
ground. Miraculously, they managed to keep their feet, but the impact
cost them valuable momentum. They managed only a few more steps before
tumbling heavily to the ground.

The Hett soldiers kept their swords drawn as Lieutenant Jaromir walked
over to the fallen men. He barked a question in rapid Praczny. One of
the soldiers who had been guarding the Avauntois straightened up and
slapped his open left hand against his breastplate. "*Sho!*"

"*Idjen cakhuisa*," Jaromir said---clean the outhouses. Red-faced, the
soldier saluted again.

"So..." Jaromir said, looking down at the bosun. "Where did you think you
were going? Or was your plan simply to knock us off the mountain one by
one?"

The bosun let fly with a stream of curses. "Maggoty goat-fondling
lackwit cake-eating..."

Jaromir waited for the bosun to wind down. "I want you to understand
something," he said. His voice was quieter than the bosun's had been,
but seemed to carry further. "We are not animals like Gaeston and Marq.
None of us---*none* of us---will ever do to you what those two did to
me---what others like them have been doing to the Hett for the last six
hundred years. It would be an insult to everything we believe."

"But you need to understand, right in your gut, that things have
changed." He clenched a fist in front of his belly for emphasis as he
spoke. "We govern here now, not you, and we will not swallow abuse or
disobedience any more than you did. We would give our lives for the
Great Work. We will certainly give yours if we have to."

He straightened up, eyes still on the fallen bosun. "Bookster! Get your
things. Sergeant Burak!"

"*Sho!*"

"*In Hepje Het zaue buikken apchala erregan. Immet na perressagern, nesh
karpe abj terteperressagern.*"

"*Sho!*" The sergeant slapped his breastplate and nodded curtly at the
bookster.

Without turning his head, Lieutenant Jaromir said, "Translate what I
just said."

Piaerre hesitated, glancing at the bookster. Razi nodded. Piaerre
cleared his throat. "Go with the bookster to... to Hepje Het. Take the
passages---"

"The tunnels," the lieutenant corrected.

"The tunnels, but not the---I don't know the last word."

"The deep tunnels," Razi supplied. "Or 'major'. It's the same word. It
could even be 'the fundamental tunnels', although---" He cut himself off,
smiling. "My apologies. Once a teacher, always a teacher. Piaerre?" The
bookster raised his hands, palms forward, and inclined his head gravely.
"Please give my regards to your parents, and my thanks. You have been a
good student." With no more than that, the bookster gathered his *deel*
around him and strode away. Sergeant Burak and two others hurried after
him.

Piaerre stared at the bookster's retreating back, bewildered. That was
it? He was just leaving? No, it couldn't be, not after everything that
had happened in the last few days. Razi had to have a plan.

"I wouldn't bother hoping for salvation from that quarter." Lieutenant
Jaromir said, as if he had read Piaerre's thoughts. But no, the Hett was
speaking to Uyves, who had regained his feet, and was also watching the
bookster walk away. "Lady Kembe is every bit as powerful as the stories
say, but she is just one woman, and very far away. She will feel us out,
and send spies, and ask herself, what should I do, but then the
Bantangui will stir up trouble again, or the Sad Duke will open his
mouth when he shouldn't, and this will all become something that has
already happened. In ten years, people will have to be reminded that it
has been ten years."

* * *

"Where in the saints' names have you been?" Laeuc demanded when Piaerre
finally arrived home. The whole family was crowded around the table,
with Mamaere Mayeule and Iseulle sharing a stool somewhat precariously
at one end. The Forecastle girl was wearing a plain brown overshirt and
black pants two sizes too large for her. Her hair hung down in braids on
either side of her face, which was clean for the first time since
Piaerre had met her.

"I have a new job," he said tiredly. He looked around for a seat.
Papaere Vurt stood and waved his grandson into his. He sniffed the air.
"Is there any rabbit left?"

"What kind of job?" Laeuc asked.

Piaerre shrugged. "I'm Lieutenant Jaromir's translator."

The stunned silence that followed was everything Piaerre had expected it
would be. His mother was the first to speak. "His translator?" she
spluttered. "I'll be a haunt before you'll be his anything!"

"I don't think I have a choice, maere. Thanks, papaere." Piaerre took
the hot plate of grilled rabbit and set it hastily on the table.

"Of course you have a choice. Laeuc, he can't---I mean, what will people
think?"

Laeuc patted the air to calm his wife. "Hold on a heartbeat, love, let
the boy speak. Piaerre, what exactly do they want you to do?"

"It doesn't matter what they want him to do!" Elaiene exploded. "No son
of mine is going to have anything to do with those---those *animals*!"

"I think you're being a little hasty," Laeuc said smoothly.

Elaiene slapped the table with her hand. Near tears in the stunned
silence that followed, she said, "Stop being so---so weeping *reasonable*!
This isn't some, some, some stallkeeper in Normous Berth who wants to
pay you a penny less for your flutes. They want to take the *mountain*
away from us!"

Piaerre concentrated on stripping the last shreds of meat from the
rabbit haunch in his hands while his father turned his cup around and
around. "What do they want you to do?" Papaere Vurt finally asked.

Piaerre swallowed. "Translate. Jaromir doesn't need me himself---his
Avauntois is a lot better than he let on. But hardly any of the others
speak it, so I have to talk to people for them. He said I'd be paid.
They have all kinds of regulations for things like that. I'm a Local
Assistant Specialist, Second Grade, so I get twenty pence for each
half-day I work, and Purplesday off, except in emergencies."

"You're not going to take a single bent penny from them," Elaiene said
tiredly.

"I don't think I have a choice," Piaerre repeated.

"What about the bosun?" Papaere Vurt asked. "The whole town saw them
drag him into Mayeule's. What did they do to him?"

"They asked him questions," Piaerre blew on the next piece of rabbit to
cool it, acutely aware that everyone was looking at him. "I think
Jaromir is our new bosun, sort of." He stopped to collect his thoughts.
After wracking his brain for three hours to conjugate Praczny verbs,
what he really wanted was mint tea with lots of sugar, and something to
read. *Something light and funny, like Juan di PerÃ§alle's *Tales of
Bloody Revenge**, he thought sourly. Something to take him as far away
from Starboard Town as possible.

But everyone was still looking at him, so he laid his fork on his plate
and sat back to collect his thoughts. "The bosun's all right, but
Jaromir asked him all kinds of questions. How many bushels of squash did
we grow each year? Who used the old tunnels as cellars? Who drank too
much, who got into fights, had anyone ever been a *penteche*, all kinds
of things."

"A what?" Laeuc asked.

"A *penteche*. It's a soldier who fights for whoever will pay him."

"A mercenary," Papaere Vurt translated. "He wanted to know if anyone
knew how to fight for real."

Piaerre twisted around in his seat to look at him. "I didn't know we had
a word for it."

Papaere Vurt shrugged. "Now you know. He asked me some of the same
questions right after they arrived. Wanted to know how long it had been
since I did any real fencing." He snorted. "I had to count it out on my
fingers. Guess that told him what he really wanted to know."

The silence that followed was broken only by the purring of the cat in
Mamaere Mayeule's lap. Laeuc looked troubled; QueÃ§enne looked miserable;
Elaiene looked angry; and Mayeule and Vurt looked at each other, both
thinking how unfairly short life was.

"Do you think there's going to be trouble?" Mayeule finally asked. "Are
they going to round people up or something?"

Vurt cleared his throat. "No, I don't think so. They're just doing what
conquerors always do."

"Which is?"

Vurt shrugged. "Figure out what's normal and what isn't. Who's going to
be a problem, who's going to stick to their hoeing..." He caught Laeuc's
eye. "And who's going to go out some night with a hoe and try to brain
one of his soldiers. You might want to pass that on to Gaeston, next
time you see him."

"What about the captain?" Iseulle asked in a small voice. "Did anyone
say anything about him?"

Piaerre scooped a slice of grilled squash off his plate. "Bosun Uyves
asked that too. Said he wasn't going to answer any more questions unless
he got some answers. I thought Jaromir was going to get angry, but then
he said, why not?"

*Bosun Uyves stood straight and tall, his hands tied behind his back.
The tinker, who had clearly always been much more than just that, sat on
the other side of the tavern table, toying absently with the
smooth-sided homestone hanging around his neck*

*Two soldiers stood guard at Mayeule's door. A third sat on a bench
behind Jaromir, taking notes on a wax tablet with a metal quill.
Something about her face made the back of Piaerre's mind itch.*

*"Your first question is probably why we're here," Jaromir said.*

*The bosun made a sound deep in his throat. "Eat cake. What have you
done with the captain?"*

*The Hett shook his head. "I don't know. No, honestly, I don't. I wasn't
at Hepje Het, although some of my men were. They told me that the
fighting didn't last long, so he may have survived. If I get word, I
promise I will tell you."*

*"You can eat your promises, too."*

*Jaromir tsk'd. "Don't be like that, Uyves. Like it or not, you and I
are going to have to work together. Your people are going to want to
tend their beans, my men have to be able to go about their business
without worrying about someone putting an ax in them... If you and I can't
get along, things could go very, very hard here, and neither of us wants
that."*

*He tucked the stone around his neck back under his shirt. "Now, about
your irrigation system---we have some ideas that might reduce the amount
of water you need..." The soldier who was taking notes pulled a hand-drawn
map from the broad leather envelope at her side and passed it to the
lieutenant.*

"That's when I recognized her," Piaerre told his family. "She was here.
Not last year, the year before, when we were at Normous. She was selling
portraits, remember? I think she did one of Chaentelle's family." He
nodded at his sister. "You wanted one of just you, but maere said we
couldn't afford it."

"But---but she wasn't Hett," QueÃ§enne said.

"Of course she wasn't," Iseulle said, with just a hint of the scornful
tone Piaerre was used to. "Spies are never what they seem to be."

"Razi," Laeuc said suddenly. "Saints, do you think he was working for
them?"

"No." Piaerre said quickly. "No, I'm sure he wasn't."

"How can you be so sure?" Vurt asked from behind him.

Piaerre and Iseulle looked at each other. "Because Razi works for Lady
Kembe," Piaerre said resignedly. "He killed some Hett in Forecastle when
they attacked."

He used the stunned silence that followed to swallow the last mouthful
of his dinner. "It started just after the mountain changed course..."

It took Piaerre less time than he'd expected to tell his family about
the secrets he'd been keeping, and the adventures he'd had. His mother's
face grow stonier with each passing moment, while his father and sister
looked at him as if he was a stranger.

When he finished, though, his grandfather put his hand on Piaerre's
shoulder and shook him gently. "Good job," he said. "Now, let me see
that hand of yours."

Piaerre held out his hand, palm up. Papaere Vurt studied it. "Doesn't
look any different," he said dubiously.

Piaerre shrugged. "It still tingles a bit. Right here." He made a ring
around his wrist with his other hand. "I have to wiggle the fingers
every once in a while or it starts itching, too."

"You could try some of the skin cream I bought in Mau Ngapcha," QueÃ§enne
volunteered diffidently. "If you wanted."

Piaerre smiled sleepily at his sister. "Thanks. Maybe in the morning"
The cream smelled like flowers, even from half a dozen strides away, but
the old woman who'd sold it to QueÃ§enne and Chaentelle had sworn that it
would cure just about anything except a cold.

"Yes, well..." Laeuc cleared his throat. "We should think about bed, I
suppose. Tomorrow's probably going to be a busy day."

"Um, about that." Piaerre cleared his throat. "Jaromir told the bosun
that we're going to have to tear down anything that's on top of the old
tunnels. He wants it done right away."

It took a moment for his words to sink in. "Tear down---that's
ridiculous!" His mother laughed angrily. "Donaien and Armaend's house is
right on top of one! They use it for a cellar."

"That's what the bosun said. Jaromir said it didn't matter. He said we'd
have to move the smokehouse, too. The bosun asked him how we'd get water
if we couldn't use the tunnels, and he said they were going to take care
of that for us."

"They can't do that!" Elaiene spluttered. "These are our homes!"

"The bosun said that too." And that was when Lieutenant Jaromir got
angry. He didn't raise his voice or pound the table, or have his men hit
the bosun again, but Piaerre had never seen a look like the one on the
Hett's face. The Hett might have been looking at a weed that needed
pulling, rather than a living, breathing man.

"No, Uyves," he said. "This isn't your home. It never was, not really.
It's ours. It always was, and it always will be. We've been away, but
we're back now. I suggest you get used to it."

* * *

Vurt, Mayeule, and Iseulle spent the night. They didn't have a
choice---when they tried to leave, the Hett patrolling Slip Street turned
them back. "Curfew," they said. It might have been the only word of
Avauntois they knew. "Curfew."

Piaerre gave up his bedroom, and was less surprised than his mother when
Vurt and Mayeule announced that they would share it. They both seemed to
take each fresh disruption and disaster in stride. Piaerre was equally
unsurprised at how quickly Iseulle hit it off with both of them: while
his mother and sister retreated to the relative safety of the kitchen,
his grandfather told Iseulle one tall tale after another, laughing as
Mayeule interrupted every few sentences to correct his exaggerations and
outright fabrications.

Finally, though, it was time to sleep. He and Iseulle piled coats and
spare blankets on the floor downstairs. "It's like the walk here from
Forecastle all over again," Piaerre grumbled, rolling his father's spare
shirt into a pillow.

"It's like normal for me," Iseulle replied. "I'm used to sleeping out."

"Oh." Piaerre felt slightly embarrassed. "What about your family?"

Iseulle studied the silhouette portrait that hung on the wall. A young
Bantangui woman with a shaved head and exaggerated false eyebrows had
drawn it the winter Piaerre turned eight. Laeuc and Elaiene's profiles
filled the center. Above them, half as large, were Laeuc's parents and
Papaere Vurt; Elaiene's mother had died a year too early to be in the
picture. QueÃ§enne and Piaerre were below their parents, facing away from
each other. "I don't want to talk about them," Iseulle said.

"Why not?"

Iseulle made a face. "I said, I don't want to talk about it."

"All right." Piaerre gave up trying to find a soft spot on his makeshift
pillow and closed his eyes. "Sleep well."

"Sleep well."

A minute passed. "Piaerre?"

"Mm?"

"When you helped Razi... Did it hurt?"

Piaerre squeezed his unfeeling hand. "Yup."

"Oh." A pause. "A lot?"

"Yup."

"Oh." Another pause. "I'd have done it for him too, if I'd been there."

"I know." This time it was Piaerre who paused. "I think... I don't think I
really did it for him, though."

He heard a rustle as Iseulle rolled onto her stomach. "So who'd you do
it for?"

Piaerre swallowed. If he'd been able to see her, he would have mumbled,
"Never mind," but there in the dark, home again after everything that
had happened, everything that had been stewing in him finally bubbled
over. "I did it for--- I did it because when the mountain shook the first
time, I was standing right next to someone, and maybe if I'd done
something then, I could have stopped him from falling, and..." He was
crying, Piaerre realized. Tears were streaming down past his temples and
into his ears, but his voice was steady. "I thought maybe doing this
would, you know, balance things somehow."

"Huh. That's stupid." Iseulle rolled onto her back again.

"Oh really?" Piaerre said, stung.

"Mm hm. Razi says that good and bad aren't like profit and loss. They
don't add up or cancel out. They just *are*, and whatever you've done,
you've done."

"Well, I guess I missed that lesson."

"I guess you did." He heard her yawn. "But it was still pretty brave of
you."

An itch woke Piaerre a few hours later. He shifted on his pile of
blankets, listening to Iseulle's soft nasal snore as he tried to figure
what wanted scratching. The itch seemed to be all over at once.

*Piaerre...* He sat up at the sound of his voice.

*Piaerre...* No. It wasn't a sound. It was a *knowledge*. Lady Kembe
wanted to talk to him ...

"Hello?" he whispered. Iseulle grunted and rolled onto her side.

He waited until he heard her snoring again. "Hello?" he repeated.
"Lady?"

*Piaerre...* The itch ebbed and vanished. After a few moments, he lay down
once more.

* * *

Orangeday, Heliodor 7^th^. A heavy knock on the door woke them just
before dawn. Piaerre pulled his shirt on over his head and answered it.

Two Hett soldiers stood there with the bosun. "Rise and shine," Uyves
said sourly. His hair, normally so carefully tended, looked like a goat
had been at it. That, and his black eye, made him look like some
half-mad cousin of the dapper bosun Piaerre knew.

"What's wrong?" Piaerre asked.

"Piaerre, who is it?" His father hurried down the stairs as Iseulle
slipped silently into the kitchen.

"It's me, Laeuc. The *lieutenant* wants everybody out in the fields."
The bosun's expression made it clear what he thought of the idea. "And
he wants Piaerre for translating."

Laeuc put his hand on Piaerre's shoulder. "Uyves, Elaiene and I talked
about it last night, and we don't think Piaerre should---"

"Doesn't matter," the bosun interrupted, shaking his head.

More footsteps as Elaiene joined them. Piaerre heard QueÃ§enne and
Mamaere Mayeule come down behind his mother to join Iseulle in the
kitchen. "Laeuc, what's happening?" Elaiene asked.

"The soldiers want Piaerre out with them. To translate."

Her jaw set. "No. I won't have it, Uyves. He's just a boy."

The bosun shrugged. "Doesn't matter. The lieutenant says we all have our
parts to play, and this is Piaerre's."

Elaiene opened her mouth to object again, but Uyves cut her off. "And
don't keep saying you won't have it, because it isn't your choice. It
isn't Piaerre's, either."

"Then whose is it?" she demanded sharply.

The bosun looked her straight in the eye. "It's mine. As far as I'm
concerned, until the captain relieves me, I'm still in charge here, and
I say Piaerre goes with them."

"But---" Elaiene and Laeuc spoke at the same time.

The bosun jerked his head toward the soldiers behind him. "Not now."

Just then, one of the soldiers nudged the other. "*Irre pentelele arpe
hebmedji sheh kerremerpele*," he said, looking past the crowd in the
doorway. Piaerre twisted around to see QueÃ§enne peeking out of the
kitchen. The soldier caught her eye and grinned. She blushed and pulled
her head back out of sight. The other soldier laughed.

Piaerre didn't understand all of what the soldier had said, but he
understood enough. "*Ap medji eshweggen*," he said. "Sit firmly on your
sword." The soldiers just laughed again.

"There, you see?" the bosun said, not having understood a word of the
exchange. "Starboard Town needs the boy right now."

It only took Piaerre a few moments to pull on the previous day's clothes
and wipe his face with a wet rag. His teeth tasted furry, but there were
no boiled twigs left in the little cup in the kitchen to scrape them
with. As he left, Elaiene pressed a hardboiled egg and some stale honey
cakes on him. "Thanks, maere," he said, hugging her.

The soldiers waited patiently for him outside. "Tell them they are to
work in the fields as they would on any other day," the first one said
slowly in Praczny. Piaerre nodded and translated his words into
Avauntois.

"What if we don't work in the fields?" Papaere Vurt asked. Instead of
putting on his false leg, he had hobbled downstairs with his pant leg
knotted below his knee, using an upside-down broom as a crutch. He
looked older than Piaerre had ever seen him---deliberately so, he suddenly
realized. The thought made him afraid: what was his grandfather up to?

The soldier shrugged when Piaerre translated Vurt's question. "Tell him
to stay in the house. And out of trouble. Now come. It is a long
street."

It was indeed a long street. Bosun Uyves knocked on each door in turn.
Sometimes he had to bang his fist and bellow to get the fearful
inhabitants to answer. Other times, the door flew open before his meaty
hand even hit it. "They want us up in the fields," Piaerre said, time
and again. "Just like any other day."

"So we're to be slaves, are we?" Gaeston snarled when his turn came. He
glared at the soldiers with bloodshot eyes. "Well, I'm not going to be a
house gelding for them. You tell them that! You tell them this isn't Ini
weeping Bantang, and they're not the Midnight weeping Admirals!"

"Put a cork in, you idiot," Bosun Uyves growled, sounding like his usual
self. "This isn't the time or the place. And anyway, it's our own food
we're growing. Or were you planning to eat moss next week?"

Gaeston crossed his arms and leaned against the doorframe. "I'm not
doing it."

Piaerre turned to the soldiers. "*Aweche panja nesh...* um, *nesh
perwerketeppen ubbo*."

The soldiers glanced at each other. The first one shrugged. The second
one turned back to Gaeston and kicked him, hard, right between the legs.

As Gaeston doubled over, the first soldier put his hand on Uyves' arm to
restrain him. "*Bashte,*" he said warningly.

"Eat cake," the bosun spat. "You're a bunch of weeping animals! Hells,
you're worse than most of the animals I know!"

"Worse than you?" the second soldier asked in strongly accented
Avauntois. "Worse than you do the lieutenant his face? Or the other
things you do, all the Hett here?"

Uyves looked him straight in the eye, challenging him. "If I'd known who
the *lieutenant* was, I'd have thrown him off the mountain myself."

"He knowed. They all knowed who come here." The first soldier nodded
vigorously as the second added something too quick for Piaerre to
follow. He caught the word for 'proud', though, and the one for 'hero'.
Anyone who heard the story *would* think Jaromir was a hero, he
realized.

Anyone but the Avauntois. With a final glare, Uyves turned to Gaeston
and said, "All right, stand up. A walk will shake 'em back into place."

Slowly, painfully, Gaeston straightened up. The look he gave the
soldiers was filled with hate. For a moment Piaerre thought he was going
to throw himself at them, but instead, he took his coat from the hook by
the door and shrugged it on. He made a show of closing the door behind
him.

As Gaeston stepped around Piaerre, he pretended to stumble slightly.
Catching hold of Piaerre's shoulder, he put his mouth next to Piaerre's
ear. "Leech," he hissed, digging his fingers into Piaerre's shoulder.

By the time they reached the Captain's House at the top of Slip Street,
the entire town was either in the fields, or trying to look busy around
their edges. Hundreds of townspeople, and only three dozen soldiers... For
one heady moment, Piaerre thought about shouting, "Charge!" So what if
the soldiers had armor, and swords? Unless one of them was secretly a
magician, the townspeople would surely win. He imagined himself dodging
the soldiers' thrusts, knocking one down, snatching up his dropped sword
and crying, "Avaunt! Avaunt!"

But what would happen then? There would just be more soldiers. Piaerre
had no idea how long it took to get from Forecastle to Starboard Town
through the tunnels, but it had to be less than the day it took on the
road. The Avauntois might win the first fight, but the Hett would win
the second. Piaerre thought of what they'd done to Forecastle, and
shivered. No matter how well the Avauntois fought, there would be more
soldiers.

In fact, there *were* more soldiers, if he looked up to the highest
terrace. The early morning sun gleamed on their helmets. These ones had
their crossbows out, though they were talking to one another more than
they were watching the people below pull up weeds and clean out
irrigation ditches.

Piaerre caught the bosun looking at him curiously. He realized his lips
had been moving. He shook his head, embarrassed. As he turned away,
Chaentelle's slow-witted half-brother tugged on his shirt. "Are we
allowed to use the stinky house?" Matthieu asked anxiously.

Piaerre smiled. "I'm sure we are." He caught the eye of a nearby
soldier. "*Ippe arenteme ephwe bae cakhuisa?*" The soldier shrugged and
waved his hand. "Go ahead," Piaerre told the boy.

Striding up the path, Lieutenant Jaromir turned his head to watch
Matthieu lumber by. The boy's steps quickened when he saw the
lieutenant, as if he wanted to break into a run, but stopped himself.
Piaerre felt a moment of pride.

"Good morning," the lieutenant said to Piaerre.

"*Sra*." Watching the soldiers nearby salute, Piaerre wondered if he was
expected to do the same, and what his father---never mind Gaeston---would
say if he did.

The lieutenant studied the people working in the field. After a moment,
Piaerre realized he was counting them. "Pretty much everyone's here,"
Piaerre said. "Except the little ones. Mamaere Mayeule has them for
lessons."

"Yes, I stopped in there on my way up," Jaromir said absently. "And your
papaere, of course. I passed him on Slip Street---is something wrong with
his leg? I've never seen him with a crutch before."

Piaerre flushed. "Um, sometimes he doesn't wear it. *Sra*. Says it gives
him sores if he doesn't give it a rest."

"Mm." Jaromir acknowledged the lie with a nod. "I imagine you were sorry
to see the bookster leave. I certainly was---he's an interesting man. How
long had you been his apprentice?"

Piaerre shrugged. "Since Mau Ngapcha. He wanted to catalog all the old
books in the Captain's House."

"Mm. And how well do you know the *birbetke* now?"

"*Sra*? I'm sorry, I don't know that word."

"The collection." Jaromir used the Avauntois word.

"Oh. Some of it, I suppose. *Sra*. The Enswer and Seyfertois and Ruudian
books, anyway, and the Praczny. I still can't read Bantangui or Thindi."

The lieutenant raised an eyebrow. "There are Thindi books there?"

"Yes *sra*, and a few that even Razi didn't recognize."

"Interesting. Well, I'd like you to keep sorting through them. Yes, I
know, there's a lot you can't do, but it would be a shame just to stop
in the middle, wouldn't it? And it will help you with your studies."

"*Sra*?"

"Your studies. You do still want to become a bookster, don't you?" The
lieutenant nodded toward the nearest knot of townspeople. "It's probably
the best thing you could do to help your people."

Switching to Avauntois, he said, "How about you, Uyves? Any interest in
broadening your education?"

The bosun had come up behind them. He glowered at the lieutenant
sullenly, but didn't reply. "No, I didn't think so," Jaromir said. He
waved a hand. "All right, both of you, carry on."

The bosun headed for his beans. Piaerre hesitated. "Lieutenant... If it's
all right, I should help my family right now. I can start studying again
later."

"Mm." The lieutenant nodded. "You don't want to stand out, do you?
Soldier's pet, and all that." The corner of his mouth twitched. "Believe
me, I know what that feels like. No, really, I do. Try being Hett for a
few years. You'll learn a lot more about being singled out than you ever
wanted to."

His tone became serious. "But whatever you do, remember this: things
have changed. The Great Work is beginning. Your people can help, or they
can stay out of the way. They won't have a third choice."

"Yes, *sra*." Piaerre hesitated. "*Sra*?"

"Mm?"

"What *is* the Great Work?"

Jaromir clapped him on the shoulder. "All in good time, all in good
time." He nodded to Piaerre and strode away, ignoring, oblivious to, or
perhaps even enjoying the hatred in the looks the Avauntois threw his
way.

Piaerre certainly felt those looks, though. As he hurried up the path to
the terrace where his family was working, he felt them on his back like
the rays of the desert sun. He wanted to shout, "Don't blame me, it's
not my fault," but he knew that would only make things worse.

When he reached the terrace, he grabbed a rake and attacked the nearest
furrow. "What was that all about?" Laeuc asked without looking up.

"He wants me to keep working in the Captain's House," Piaerre said. "He
said it would be the best way to help."

"Help? Help what?"

"Help everyone," Piaerre said. "I mean, us. The Avauntois." The word
sounded strange in Piaerre's ears.

"Nice to know they care," his mother said. "Marq asked me what in hell's
burning forests you thought you were doing. Gaeston wasn't even that
polite. I told them you didn't have a choice, they picked you out
because you knew their language, but I don't think they care." She
grabbed the base of a thistle and yanked it from the dry soil.

"Did either of them say what they thought I should do?" Piaerre asked
bitterly.

"Easy, easy," Laeuc said, patting the air placatingly. "Let's not fight
among ourselves, all right?"

"You mean 'let's not fight at all', don't you?" his wife said bitterly,
taking hold of another thistle. "Just like always---let's not fight, let's
not disagree, let's try to see *their* side. Maybe it's time you started
seeing *our* side for once."

Piaerre held his breath as his father stood up and brushed his hands on
his coat. "Yes, well," he said uncertainly. "So, Piaerre, what can you
tell us about this girl you dragged with you? She and Mayeule seem to be
getting along fine, but we don't even know who her people are."

"I don't think she has people," Piaerre said.

"Well, how did you meet her?"

"She tried to steal the bosun's wallet when we went to Forecastle.
Remember, I told you? They put her in the dungeon. But it's all right,"
he added hastily, seeing the looks on his parents' faces. "We can trust
her. The bookster did."

"Oh really?" his mother said dryly.

"He did!"

His mother frowned. "Piaerre, until we know what's going on---what's
*really* going on---the only people we can trust are ourselves. Do you
understand? Not this girl you brought with you that no one here has ever
met before, not the bookster, as kind as he's been, no one but Starboard
Towners born and bred. We're the only ones we can be sure of."

"What about papaere?" Piaerre asked bitterly. "He's wasn't born here.
And come to that, you're only half Avauntois."

"Piaerre!" His mother's face blazed. "You will *not* speak to me that
way, do you understand? And you will not speak about your family that
way either."

Piaerre looked at the ground sullenly. "Where is Iseulle anyway?"

"Armaend and Donaien took her," his mother said curtly.

Piaerre looked over at the next field, where Armaend and Donaien were
showing Iseulle how to pry ackermed shoots out from among the beans. "I
have to go talk to her," he said. "I'll be right back." He walked away
without looking back.

Donaien was sitting on an overturned bucket, pointing out weeds to
Iseulle, while Armaend pointed out the ones he missed. Iseulle was
gossiping non-stop about people in Forecastle: who took quick nips from
a bottle hidden under the counter when there were no customers in his
shop, whose daughters looked nothing at all like her husband, who had
shortchanged himself in a complex business deal in Mau Ngapcha...

*They're enjoying her company more than they ever enjoyed mine*, Piaerre
thought sourly. She was certainly better at talking than she was at
gardening---she had smudges on her face from brushing her hair out of her
eyes with her dirty hands, and any six-year-old Starboard Towner would
already have filled her bucket twice over.

"Good morning," Piaerre said.

"Piaerre." Donaien nodded at him seriously. "Your friend has just
discovered it's easier to pull ackermed up from underneath, instead of
by grabbing the stem."

Piaerre smiled insincerely. "That's nice. Could I talk to her for a
moment?"

Donaien exchanged a look with Armaend. "As long as you're just talking,"
Armaend said archly, as Donaien stood and stretched. "But it'd probably
be best if you kept weeding too. The tinheads are watching all the
time."

"They're fun," Iseulle said, sitting back on her haunches and watching
the two men as they walked, lost in one of their endless
not-quite-arguments, to the other side of the field.

Piaerre shrugged. "I suppose." He sat down on Donaien's bucket. "Listen,
we have to get Razi's things. Now." Quickly, he told her about hearing
Lady Kembe's voice in the night.

She nodded. "All right. Do you remember where they are?"

Piaerre blinked. "Don't you?"

"There's a lot of trees out there," she said defensively. "If we'd put
them in someone's basement, or on a roof, I'd remember for sure."

Piaerre couldn't help but grin. "Fair enough." He thought for a
heartbeat. "I can get them this afternoon, but how are we going to sneak
them into town?"

"Oh, you can leave that to me," Iseulle said confidently. "I know all
about sneaking in towns."

* * *

Piaerre worked with Iseulle until midday. He offered to share his lunch
with her, but she declined. "Mamaere Mayeule's expecting me," she said,
tossing a last handful of weeds into the bucket. "But don't worry---I'll
be back in time."

Piaerre reheased his story in his head on his way to the Captain's
House. *I need peace and quiet to study. And someone needs to check on
the goats.* When he knocked on the library door, the soldier who had
been taking notes the night before answered. "*Eue?*" Piaerre started to
explain what he wanted. Halfway through his third sentence, she said,
"*Eshe*," and let him in.

She and another soldier Piaerre hadn't seen before had taken over the
long table in the center of the library. The piles of books that he and
Razi had left there (*only a week ago*, Piaerre thought---it seemed like
years) had been moved to the floor. In their place was a printed map of
Avaunt, crisscrossed with dashed lines that could only be tunnels. As
the Hett bent over it, Piaerre saw the homestones around their necks.

Piaerre pulled a book from the nearest pile, thanked the woman, and
hurried out. Back on Slip Street, he willed himself to walk more slowly.
"Just act normal," he said under his breath, repeating Iseulle's parting
words.

The soldiers at the edge of town turned him back. He protested, but his
Praczny wasn't enough to convince them that a skinny boy with a book
under his arm had permission to go anywhere.

Back at the beanfields, Lieutenant Jaromir seemed pleased. "They'd have
been cleaning underpits for a month if they'd let you by," he said
approvingly. He took a flat metal token from his pocket and handed it to
Piaerre. "Here. Show them this. But mind the curfew---you're to be indoors
by sundown like everyone else."

"Yes, *sra*." Piaerre tucked the pass into his copy of *The Customs,
Laws, and Language of Northern Praczedt: A Guide For Those So Fortunate
As To Have Been Born Elsewhere*, by A Gentleman. It was only a piece of
paper, but it made him feel as if he had been branded.

The soldiers barely glanced at the pass before waving him on. As he
walked along the stony road through the woods, Piaerre kept glancing
into the trees to see if any more soldiers were lurking among them. He
couldn't, but that didn't make him feel any more secure.

The goat pasture's brush fence needed mending in a couple of places, but
the animals themselves were as uninterested in him as usual. He found a
flat rock to sit on, and opened A Gentleman's book. "*Errebe*... I was.
Past tense." He moved his finger along the line, glancing up every few
moments in the hope of catching sunlight glinting off a helmet.

Past tense... Past continuous... Present continuous... The nouns were
easy---they were almost the same as in Seyfertois and Avauntois. But many
of the verbs were borrowed from Ruudian. "*Yevtene*... He was traveling.
Past continuous." He flexed his hand as he read, wiggling his fingers to
ease the itching around his wrist. He suddenly remembered that QueÃ§enne
had pressed some of her precious Bantangui skin cream on him that
morning. He had been as embarrassed accepting it as she had seemed
giving it to him, but maybe it would help. He fished the brown pottery
vial out of his pocket, pulled the cork---

---and froze. "In Marandine, the chief village of the cloudherds, I met
three men who claimed to be nobility from Anyalcze, a fish-smelling town
with pretensions to grandeur in the north of Praczedt," he read, not
realizing he was speaking aloud. "They were fleeing from prosecution for
a crime which they swore they had not committed, though in all my
travels in that sorry country, I have never yet met one who would admit
prosecution against him justified. Seeking to avoid...something, they came
roundabout the mountains through a town they called Tin Head."

A chill prickled the small hairs on Piaerre's arms. He put the vial of
skin cream down on the rock beside him and turned the book over to look
at its cover. It couldn't be a coincidence. Was Lady Kembe trying to
send him a message? Or was this just some leftover bit of magic that the
bookster had been meant to find?

He opened the book again. "They came roundabout the mountains through a
town they called Tin Head. It is in Anyalcze's lands, but not of it, as
its people do not recognize the length of its dukes. No, wait, that must
be 'rule'." He bent his head over the book, reading as fast as he could.

*Its people have some small farming, but are miners by love and trade.
One among the Praczny, an ill-kept rogue for all that he spoke well,
said that they worshipped the earth. Another, no better kept, disagreed,
saying that they worshipped not the earth, but some speaking stone they
had found in it that was their king and oracle. The third (who was the
only one who knew how to hold a fork properly) agreed with the second,
and spoke further of some Great Work upon which these deluded people
believed themselves embarked. He knew not what it was, but claimed they
had invited him to join them in it. At which point, his companions grew
sullen, wondering aloud why he had not spoken of this beforetimes. For
all their pretty accents, I think them ill-starred, and am confident
that by the time these words are before you, Learned Reader, they will
have separately or jointly been hanged as they undoubtedly deserve.*

Piaerre dabbed his finger in the skin cream and worked it into his left
hand. What *was* the "Great Work"? It couldn't mean invading the
mountain---Lieutenant Jaromir had spoken as if it still lay ahead. He
shook his head. As hard as it was to stomach, it seemed that for the
Hett, conquering Avaunt was just a stepping stone to something else. But
what? He corked the vial, put it back in his pocket, and scrambled to
his feet, suddenly impatient to be moving.

He slowed as he reached the spot where he, Razi, and Iseulle had come
out of the forest onto Forecastle Road. An irving trilled somewhere
nearby. A bush rustled slightly in answer. He tensed, then saw a
white-and-brown flash as the rabbit darted away.

He knelt down, looking around as he pretended to re-tie his boot lace.
There was no sign of any Hett soldiers. He stood again and stepped
closer to the tree, fumbling as if to undo his trousers. He really *did*
need to make water, he realized. Did real heroes at times like this?

Then he was done, and had no more reason to delay. He set his book
carefully against the base of the tree, took a deep breath, and chinned
himself up onto the first branch. It took him two tries to hook a leg
over it. Sap stickied his hands, and pine needles crawled inside his
shirt as he stood up on the branch, wincing at the amount of noise he
was making.

Just above him, he could see Razi's leather case and green bottle.
Iseulle had climbed higher than he'd realized. He sidled along the
branch, holding a smaller one above him for balance. It would be a short
drop if he fell, but a painful one.

There---he had it. He slung the picture case over his shoulder, then undid
his fleece vest and slipped the bottle inside. It was heavier than he
had expected, and warm, like water left standing in the sun.

A few moments later he was back on the ground. He brushed as much of the
sap off his hands as he could before picking up his book. He just hoped
Iseulle had done her part.

Ten minutes later he was crouching behind a shrub at the edge of the
woods on the edge of the lower beanfields, cursing her in Avauntois,
Seyfertois, and Praczny. Where was she? The sun was about to kiss the
peak of the mountain---much longer, and he'd have to hide Razi's things
again to get home before curfew.

Then she came around the corner, pushing a wheelbarrow brimming with
twigs and thistles. He sighed with relief. The only soldier he could see
was two terraces away, and seemed more interested in getting the inside
of his nose clean than in a girl doing chores.

Iseulle reached the edge of the field. "Gosh, how silly of me," she said
loudly. "I wasn't supposed to bring this here. I was supposed to take it
to the burning pit. Oh, but it's so heavy. It would be wonderful if
someone could help me."

"Sst," Piaerre hissed from the woods. "Iseulle. Stop it! This isn't a
game!"

She put her hand to her ear theatrically. "What's that? It sounded like
a snake."

"Bring it over here," Piaerre whispered loudly. "Closer to the trees."

Iseulle trundled the wheelbarrow closer. Piaerre crept forward and
tucked the case and bottle under the thistles. "Are they covered?" he
whispered. Iseulle nodded without speaking. "All right. Is anyone
watching?"

Iseulle lifted the wheelbarrow by its handles once again and turned it
around. "Uh uh."

"Good." Piaerre straightened up and handed her his book. "Here, take
this. I'll push."

Iseulle looked him up and down. "You look like you've been sleeping in a
bush again," she said critically. "Someone's going to want to know why."

Piaerre glanced down at himself. She was right. "*Saad*." Should he
leave her to deal with Razi's things while he went back through the
forest to Forecastle Road?

Before he could finish the thought, Iseulle thrust the book back into
his hands. "Here, hold this." She lay down on the ground and rolled over
a few times.

Piaerre gaped at her. "What are you doing?"

She stood up, raised her arms, and studied the twigs and bits of grass
clinging to her jacket. "That should do," she said, satisfied. "Come
on."

With Iseulle at his side, Piaerre trundled the wheelbarrow back across
the field. "Looks like you two have been busy," one of the soldiers said
loudly in Praczny as they went past, elbowing his partner in the ribs.
Piaerre blushed furiously as the other man guffawed.

QueÃ§enne's jaw dropped as she caught sight of her little brother and the
girl he had brought back from Forecastle, looking as though they had
been wrestling---or something---on the forest floor. Piaerre caught her eye
and shook his head slightly. *Not now*, he mouthed at her, hoping
fervently that his mother wouldn't see him before he had a chance to
clean up. He would almost rather be tortured by the Hett...

Halfway down Slip Street, Piaerre turned the wheelbarrow into the narrow
lane beside Mamaere Mayeule's. The shutters on her kitchen window had
been left open. As they went past, Iseulle slipped the case and bottle
out from under the trash and pushed them through the window. There was a
faint thud as they fell onto the waiting pile of blankets.

Back on the street, Piaerre felt as though he had an archery target
pinned between his shoulderblades. He didn't know what the soldiers
would do if they found Razi's things, but he suspected it would be
harsh---harsh on Mamaere Mayeule, harsh on everyone.

He emptied the wheelbarrow into the stone-lined burning pit behind the
outhouses, just as he had a hundred times before. He hated the pit's
acrid, ashy smell. Every time the mountain berthed at Mau Ngapcha, the
townspeople shoveled the pit out and spread its contents on their
fields. It was a dirty, choking job. He sighed loudly.

"What's wrong?" Iseulle asked.

"Nothing." Piaerre shook his head. "Just missing something I never
thought I'd miss. Let's go."

The sun was slipping behind the mountain's peak as Iseulle wheeled the
wheelbarrow back to the fields. Piaerre trudged over to his father, who
was kneeling beside another man. "Just about done?" Piaerre asked.

"Just about," his father said. "But there's someone here who wants to
talk to you."

The other man carefully patted a handful of earth around the base of the
squash he had just replanted. "Hello, Piaerre," he said. "How's your
hand?"

"It's fine, thank you," Piaerre said uncertainly. He recognized that
voice...

"I could have a look at it later, if you want." The man stood, brushing
the dirt from his hands. He looked completely ordinary, with a round,
dark face, dark hair, and a solemn expression.

Suddenly, just for an instant, Piaerre's eyes refocused. Orange hair,
blue eyes, a mocking grin---it was Thomas.

Piaerre gasped. The illusion rippled back into place, so that the
magician looked like just another Avauntois bean farmer once again.

"Best not to gawp," he said calmly. "Don't want any soldiers wondering
what your long-lost uncle is doing, do we? Now, if you'd be so kind, I
could use a hand with this." The magician knelt once again and began
uprooting another squash.

Piaerre went down on his knees beside him. "What are you doing here?" he
hissed. "I thought you ran away."

"Flew away, actually," the magician corrected. "I find it much more
efficient. Pass me that trowel, would you?"

Piaerre clenched his teeth. "You tell me what you're doing here, or I'm
going straight to Lieutenant Jaromir."

"Don't raise your voice to me, whelp." Thomas's voice was as sweet as
cream. "And keep in mind, any conversation I have with the good
lieutenant will almost certainly come around to the subject of your left
hand. Oh yes, I know about that---candlemark is easy to see if you have
the right eyes. I'll bet the lieutenant would know what it was. As a
matter of fact..." Thomas sat back on his haunches, looking thoughtful.
"As a matter of fact, I'd be surprised if his masters didn't already
know about it."

"Oh yeah? Then why haven't they already arrested me?"

Thomas shrugged, patting dirt around the roots of a squash plant. "I
suppose they've decided to let bygones be bygones. There's not much you
can do on your own, and there's no point ruffling the good lady's
feathers, is there?"

Before Piaerre could answer, a soldier called, "*Yevve!*" from the
terrace above them---time's up. He looked up, puzzled. The sun had just
kissed the mountain's shoulder; there was still at least an hour of
daylight. He stood up, brushing his hands on his trousers---

---and stumbled as the mountain lurched beneath him. People screamed,
birds exploded into the air from the trees fifty strides away, and a
tray of clay winter planting pots toppled over with a crash.

Laeuc grabbed his son's arm. "What the hells is happening?"

"We've taking off, you idiot," Thomas snapped. "How very inconvenient.
Boy! Where's the bookster? Where's Razi?"

"The soldiers took him to Forecastle!"

A sardonic smile danced a brief jig across Thomas's lips. "Really? Did
they put him in chains? Oh please, tell me they put him in chains."

"No, he went with them." Above them, more soldiers were shouting *yevve,
yevve!* as they walked in a broad line across the field, shooing the
Avauntois toward Slip Street.

Thomas scowled. "Did he leave her portrait with you?"

"What?"

"Did he leave his picture of Lady Kembe with you?" the magician repeated
impatiently. "I need it to talk to her."

"Why would *she* want to talk to *you*?"

Thomas sighed. "Because I'm here and he isn't. We *are* all trying to
save the world, you know."

Piaerre hesitated. "It's at Mamaere Mayeule's," he admitted, mentally
adding, *But you're not getting his sword.* "I was going to use it
tonight."

Another shudder ran through the ground. A breeze had sprung up, not
strong, but enough to put frightened looks on everyone's faces. They
were going straight up.

"I think we may want to try a little earlier," Thomas said dryly.

* * *

Mamaere Mayeule set out the best she had for dinner that evening, as if
it were a real Departure Eve---spiced pork sausages, rice with fresh
cauliflower, and a jar of mango chutney that she had been saving to give
Vurt as a naming day present---but the mood around her big table was
somber. QueÃ§enne had gone to stay with Chaentelle's family, so Uyves sat
glowering beside Laeuc, having declared that he'd walk home when they
finished eating, curfew or no curfew, and take his bruises as they came.
Iseulle was upstairs, having refused (much to the magician's amusement)
to sit at the same table as Thomas.

A cup of strong tea cooled untouched near Thomas's elbow as he recounted
what he'd seen the night Forecastle fell. He had taken to the
*Presumption* at the first sign of trouble. Hidden among the clouds, he
had watched squads of Hett soldiers fan out from boarded-up wells and
forgotten basements to cut the town's neighborhoods off from one
another. As they took control of the streets, a quartet of magicians
threw banefire at the militia gathering in the market square.

"Their aim was really quite impressive," he said, as if commenting on a
children's ball game. "Especially considering the spell's price."

"Which is?" the bosun growled impatiently.

Thomas tapped a finger against his temple. "Your eyes. Both of them. You
have to take them out yourself. After that, all you can see is fire."

"Do you have to replace them with anything?" Piaerre asked, remembering
the Hett in the sedan chair he'd seen in Forecastle.

Thomas cocked his head to the side. "What an odd question. No, not as
far as I know. Why do you ask?" Piaerre shrugged. He still didn't trust
Thomas---the less he gave away, the better.

Portside fell next. There had been real fighting there, but as at
Forecastle, the outcome was never in doubt. "What do you mean, real
fighting?" Elaiene asked.

Thomas cleared his throat. "Yes. Well, the locals managed to put some
arrows into the first few Hett they saw, so the rest went back into the
tunnels and waited for reinforcements. By the time they arrived, the
bosun and a few other men had made a little fort for themselves in a
barn."

"So the Hett fired it," Vurt said flatly. Thomas shrugged, nodding.

"Oh dear saints," Elaiene breathed. Laeuc leaned over to put his arm
around her, but she shrugged it off without looking at him.

Then it had been Starboard Town's turn. Perhaps they had learned from
Portside, or perhaps their plan had been different all along, but when
they came, they came in greater numbers. Thomas hadn't bothered to watch
them seize Aft Landing. Instead, he had flown his ship low across the
forest, hidden by the morning fog, and set it down near the bottom of
Vurt's ladder.

When asked why he'd come back, Thomas took a fist-sized sea shell out of
his pocket. Faint seams of pink and gold shone in its ivory white whorl.
He passed it to Piaerre. "Here---listen."

Piaerre turned it over in his hands. It was heavier than it looked, and
smelled faintly sandy. "Go ahead," Thomas urged him. "It won't bite."

Piaerre held it up to his ear. At first, all he heard was a rushing
sound, like air being blown over the mouth of a bottle. Then, faintly,
beneath the susurrus, he heard dozens of voices whispering in Avauntois,
Praczny, and other languages.

"What is it?" Laeuc asked.

"Voices," Piaerre said, handing it back to the magician. "Hundreds of
voices."

Thomas set it on the table. "Despite what playwrights would have us
believe, most people don't actually engage in soliloquies. And when they
do talk to themselves, well, half of them are practicing what they
should have said the night before, while the rest are making sure that
if they're ever made Emir of Coriandel, they'll have an acceptance
speech ready. No, thank you." He waved away the teapot Elaiene was
proferring. "They do talk about useful things once in a while, though.
You just have to be patient. Like the Hett---as near as I can tell,
they've been working for over a hundred years to get Avaunt back."

At that, the bosun boiled over. "I don't give a blister on a rat's bum
how long they've been working! The mountain is *ours*! My
great-grandfather's naming day tree is up there, and my mother's is
right next to it!"

Thomas nodded. "Just so. But if you walk up the road a little further,
you might still find some that the Hett planted when they lived here."

"That was five hundred years ago! They have no right to come here and---
and--- No, I will *not* 'lower my voice'! It's our weeping mountain, and
I'll make as much damn noise as I want!" He pushed himself back in his
chair and glared at Laeuc, who had been shooting worried glances at the
front door.

"And if they threw us over the side tomorrow morning, would it still be
'our mountain' in a hundred years?" Laeuc asked. "Or two hundred?"

"Damned right it would!"

"Enough," Vurt said sharply. "I want to know how they got the mountain
to change course. And what they're going to do now."

"Ah, well," Thomas said, "That's where I have to start speculating. It
all comes down to something they call the *Uremme Bech*: the Guide
Stone."

Piaerre's breath caught. What had the book said? They worshipped not the
earth, but some speaking stone they found in it that was their king and
oracle. "It's 'Pilot Stone'," he corrected automatically. "Guide is just
*urem*, not *uremme*." He flushed slightly at Thomas's look.

"Mm, well, Pilot Stone, then. They found in their silly tin mine. It may
even be why they started mining in the first place---it spoke to them in
their dreams. 'The world is broken, free me and we will mend it...'" He
waved his words away. "After four hundred years of being treated like
lepers, I imagine it was all quite seductive."

"So what is this stone?" Vurt asked.

Thomas shrugged. "There's only ever one explanation for something that
powerful. It must have been made by the Angels."

The stunned silence that followed was broken only by the mewling of a
hungry cat somewhere outside. "Saints and bloody murder," Uyves spat.
"This just keeps getting better, doesn't it?"

Whatever quip Thomas might have made in reply was cut short by a sudden
wail from the floor above. "That's Iseulle!" Piaerre exclaimed. As he
struggled to untangle his legs and his chair's, Mamaere Mayeule hurried
up the stairs. A door opened; there was another wail, then sobbing.

As Mayeule led the weeping, stumbling girl down to the common room,
Laeuc pushed his chair back and shouldered around his son. "Hoy," he
said gently. "Hoy, what's wrong? What is it?"

"He's dead!" Iseulle wailed, burying her face in Mayeule's bosom. "He's
dead!"

Laeuc and Mayeule exchanged puzzled glances. "Who's dead?" the old woman
asked. "The bookster?"

"N-no," Iseulle hiccupped wretchedly. "Th-the captain. They killed him."

"Oh dear saints," Mayeule whispered, folding the little girl into her
arms.

"Hoy," Laeuc said again, as if he were coaxing a kitten out from under a
bed. "Who told you? How do you know?"

"Because I *felt* it!" Iseulle pushed Mamaere Mayeule away and wiped her
nose on her sleeve.

"Too much excitement," the bosun muttered, but even as he spoke, Thomas
was pushing Laeuc aside.

"What did you feel?" he demanded, ignoring Mamaere Mayeule's glare.
"Tell me, exactly what did you feel?"

Iseulle sniffled back her tears. "It was c-c-cold. All of a sudden. And
then it was like---like---"

"Like you were a bell being run?" Iseulle gulped and nodded.

The magician straightened up and ran his fingers through his hair.
"Well, that's that, then, isn't it?" He stabbed a finger at Piaerre. "I
need that portrait---now! And you!" He redirected the finger to Uyves.
"Please, tell me you have some weapons hidden away somewhere."

"You don't believe this little snip, do you?"

The corner of Thomas's mouth twitched. "I'd show a little more respect
if I were you. This 'little snip' is your new captain."

Elaiene's hand flew to her mouth. "You're his daughter?" she gasped.
Iseulle nodded miserably. "But I thought--- We all thought---"

"Perhaps you could save those thoughts for later?" Thomas's finger was
back pointing at Piaerre. "The portrait---now."

Piaerre took the stairs to Iseulle's room three at a time. Evening had
fallen; through the half-open shutters, he heard boots on Slip Street's
cobblestones. The tube containing Lady Kembe's picture lay on top of a
roof beam, right where he had told Iseulle to put it. Standing in the
middle of the bed, he jumped up and tapped it with one hand, catching it
as it fell, then looked at the window again. The bottle containing
Razi's sword stood on the shelf beside it. Should he?

"Piaerre?"

"Just a beat!" he called back. He grabbed the bottle and its belt and
hurried back downstairs.

"The Hett are all out on the street," he whispered loudly.

"Good," Thomas said, sliding Lady Kembe's portrait from its container.
"As long as they're not in here. Now, bosun, if you wouldn't mind
watching the door?"

Without waiting, the magician rolled the picture flat on the table and
stood a candle beside it. He didn't bother with a knife: he just pinched
the back of his left hand with the thumb and first finger of his right
and jerked. Blood welled up where his nails cut the skin.

One drop, two, three... "Good evening, *sra*," Thomas said, bowing
politely toward the picture.

"Where is she?" Laeuc whispered.

"Sh!" Piaerre patted the air with his hand. "I'll tell you later."

The conversation was brief. Thomas summarized what he had told the
Avauntois earlier, adding the news that the captain's daughter had felt
him leave. Yes, she was safe, at least for now. Yes, Thomas could get
her off the mountain---assuming, of course, that he could get off himself.
It was tied up nearby. No. No. Yes, quite a few---they were patrolling the
street ("There is only one") in pairs, and of course there'd be more in
the shadows. No. No.

Then Thomas fell silent, his frown deepening with every heartbeat. "Yes,
*sra*," he finally said. "But they'll have to do the rest. I really
can't..." He spread his hands apologetically, his sentence trailing off as
the candle flickered and died.

"Well?" Vurt asked.

Thomas rubbed his eyes wearily. "Hells. She said they've started.
Whatever their 'great work' is, it's happening tonight, right at the top
of the mountain. It's more power than she's ever felt, and she wants us
to stop it."

"*She* wants *us* to stop it?" Laeuc said incredulously. "Why not you?"

"Oh, find your plums, man," Elaiene muttered under her breath.

Thomas spread his hands apologetically. "Because, as the bosun keeps
saying, it's your mountain."

Uyves snorted. "Magicians. All right, what are we supposed to do?"

"Our only chance is to take the Pilot Stone away from them," Thomas said
crisply, his usual insouciance evaporating. "Lady Kembe says they'll be
bringing it to the peak at midnight. The tunnels run most of the way,
but the last gallop is out in the open. I can take six of you, no
more---if you're lucky, and they're careless, you might actually have a
ghost's chance of grabbing it."

"And then what? Smash it?"

"Absolutely not," Thomas said sharply. "You bring it to me."

"Why not?" Uyves asked. "One whack with a big enough hammer, and that's
the end of their great work."

"Possibly, but if I'm right, it would also be the end of the mountain.
I'm not sure, but I suspect that stone is what keeps Avaunt flying. If
you smash it, you'll all be part of the landscape a few heartbeats
later."

Sudden suspicion turned Piaerre's gut cold. "You want it for yourself,
don't you? You want to control the mountain like they've been doing!"

Thomas sighed. "Saints save me from half-clever men. Yes, conceivably, I
might---*might*---be able to use it that way. But why would I want to? Being
your captain interests me rather less than being a stable boy."

"Then why?" Vurt asked.

Thomas shrugged. "Because I want to know how it works. I want to know
where you find the power to move a mountain." He pointed at the dayglass
lantern in the middle of the table. "They made that by the ton, and all
we can do is dig it up and polish it. We're so *little* compared to
them. Now, who's coming along on our little expedition?"

It only took a minute to pick names. Uyves, of course, but not Vurt, not
up at the peak with one leg. Laeuc would come---he didn't look at his wife
when he volunteered, nor she at him. Gaeston was the best archer in
Starboard Town, so that meant Marq as his spearman, and Armaend and
Donaien made six. The *Presumption* was tied up below Vurt's
cottage---well, it had been when the mountain took off, anyway.

"You'll want me with you, then," Vurt said. "I left a few things on the
stairs in case the Tinheads decided to come snooping."

Uyves snorted. "Of course you did. Right, then, Laeuc and I will get
Gaeston and Marq. Piaerre, can you get up to Donaien and Armaend's
without being caught?" Piaerre nodded. The bosun looked around the
table. "Well then? Let's be on with it."

* * *

Unable to watch as his father awkwardly said goodbye to his mother,
Piaerre had bounded upstairs. "Here," he said, handing a small book
bound in faded red leather to Iseulle. "Something to read while we're
gone. Razi gave it to me."

Iseulle opened it. "*Unprofitable Speculations*," she read aloud. "By
His Balance, Eimin di CuayaÃ§edil."

Thomas rolled his eyes. "Oh, you *can't* be serious..."

Iseulle hugged the book. "Thanks," she whispered.

Piaerre nodded, suddenly feeling as awkward as his father. "Take care of
it, all right? No folded corners or anything." He leaned forward and
kissed her clumsily on the cheek.

A minute later, with both of the lanterns in the tavern's main room
covered, they slipped out the back door: Uyves, Thomas, and Laeuc in
front, Piaerre and his grandfather behind them. "Wait!" Piaerre
whispered back. Two soldiers stood at the top of Slip Street next to a
lantern on a stake, just as they had the night before. Another lantern
shone unguarded at the bottom of the street.Voices and laughter from the
yard of the Captain's House, and the sound of an inexpertly-played
flute, gave evidence that the Hett were making themselves at home.

"What?" the bosun whispered back.

Piaerre shook his head. "Just wait." A moment later, he heard the creak
of leather, and the scuff of a boot.

Piaerre put his mouth to the bosun's ear. "The soldiers with the
lanterns are just a decoy," he whispered. "There's more by the
smokehouse. You'll have to go around."

Uyves exchanged a look with Laeuc. This wasn't the Piaerre they had
known since childhood.

The night was cold and clear, the moon just a thin silver sliver in the
sky. Stars twinkled around it, as indifferent and aloof as ice crystals.
The Brumosos were a dark, jagged cut across the horizon. The mountain
had stopped climbing, and was flying north---farther than ever from its
age-old course, and from everything the Avauntois had ever know.

Piaerre crept from one hiding place to another, huddling side by side
where the shadows were deepest. Once he was only ten strides from a
soldier relieving himself in a wilted vanity garden, but the Hett didn't
hear the boy's heart pounding behind the woodpile.

Donaien and Armaend's house nestled in a bend in the road like a baby in
the crook of its mother's arm. A freshly-painted summer chair stood
beside the back door. Gingerly, Piaerre placed a peeling stool on top of
it, shook it to make sure it was steady, then stepped onto it and rapped
his knuckles softly on the upstairs bedroom's shutters. "Psst," he
hissed through the slats. "Donaien! Armaend! Wake up!"

"Unh? Whazz?" someone grunted.

"Wake up! It's me, Piaerre!"

Someone threw back a quilt. Piaerre ducked his head sharply as the
shutters swung open.

Donaien blinked at him. "Piaerre---what are you doing? The tinheads will---"

"Get dressed," Piaerre hissed urgently. "And get your climbing harness,
and your spear. Now! The bosun's waiting for you. Both of you." He
grabbed at the windowsill to steady himself as the peeling stool shifted
beneath him. "We have to save the mountain."

It took less than a minute for the two men to pull on some clothes,
collect their gear, and scramble out the window, but it felt like an age
to Piaerre as crouched in the shadows behind a leafless sprigness bush.
Any soldier who looked his way would be sure to see him...

Donaien dropped to the ground. Armaend landed beside him a moment later,
the harness in his hand jingling slightly.

"What's going on?" Armaend whispered loudly.

"Sh!" Piaerre whispered back. "Lady Kembe says we have to stop them. Now
come on!"

Corner by corner, house by house, one back yard at a time, they crept
like thieves through the town they had always called home. A faint tang
of pine smoke hung in the air, as familiar to Piaerre as the smell of
his own sweat. A young goat bleated from a rooftop pen; a cat darted
across the street, startling them into silent immobility for a moment.
Somewhere nearby, a soldier laughed at another's joke. All around them,
people sat in front of their fireplaces or lay awake in their beds,
wondering where they were bound, and what new disaster would befall them
tomorrow.

Thomas, Laeuc, Uyves, and Gaeston were waiting for them in the trees a
dozen strides past the end of Slip Street. Two soldiers lay awkwardly on
the ground beside them, their blood a darker stain on the dark ground.
Marq sat beside them, knotting a strip of cloth around a fresh wound in
his leg to match the one still wrapped around his broken jaw.

"Saints---you've killed them!" Armaend gasped.

"Had to be done," Gaeston said, in the same tone he would have used if
the dead men had been rabbits caught among his tomatoes. "And it's two
less we'll have to---"

"*Forchem!*" a harsh voice shouted behind them. A sharp whistle pierced
the night.

"Go!" the bosun shouted, snatching up a sword from beside one of the
fallen soldiers and turning toward the shout.

*Thunk!* The crossbow quarrel hit him full in the chest. One moment he
was standing, the next he was down on the ground, his arms flung out at
his sides. The feathered end of the quarrel stuck up out of his chest
like a lone tree on an otherwise barren island. His sword clattered past
Piaerre's feet.

*Swick!* Piaerre cried out as another bolt whistled past his ear, then
turned and scrambled down the ladder two rungs at a time.

Piaerre yelped when his grandfather grabbed his leg at the bottom. "Are
you all right?" Papaere Vurt demanded.

"The bosun," Piaerre choked. "He's--- Papaere, they shot him."

Papaere Vurt pushed him forward. "Go with your paere!" A dozen strides
away, the *Presumption* bobbed up and down in the air next to the
verandah. Gaeston, Donaien, and Armaend were already on board, clutching
white-knuckled at the gunwales as Laeuc climbed in awkwardly beside
them. At the bow, Thomas was hurriedly untying the boat's tether.

Piaerre's boots drummed on the verandah. Laeuc grabbed his son's hand
and pulled him over the gunwale. Just as Piaerre felt onto the deck,
someone screamed at the top of the stairs.

The Avauntois all ducked. "What are you waiting for?" Papaere Vurt
yelled. "Get the hells out of here!" He yanked hard on the cord in his
hand, and was answered by another scream.

"Go!" the old man bellowed again. Thomas tossed the mooring line into
the boat's bow and vaulted in after it. The *Presumption* dipped
slightly and drifted away from the porch.

Vurt watched the boat drop out of sight, then stooped to pick up another
string. He had spent most of the afternoon preparing surprises for
unexpected guests. It would take the soldiers a few minutes to put a
tourniquet on their unlucky comrade's leg. They would move cautiously
after that, poking each step with their swords before putting weight on
it. He doubted that they'd think to check the branches over their heads...

The *Presumption* turned to port in a long, descending arc to point back
the way the mountain had come. In the distance, the great stone tower
that had been built to await the mountain's was a glint of silver-white
among the trees. There was nothing left of Tinhead except a scar in the
earth, a gallop wide and a hundred strides deep. Piaerre wondered what
people would make of it a thousand years hence. The scar would probably
become a little lake, but what about the tower? Would it still stand
there, its urpose forgotten, like the giant stone hands that reached up
out of the plains of Darp? Would anyone remember why it had been built,
or what it had meant?

"I'll remember," Piaerre whispered, thinking of the bosun. The tears on
his cheeks were cold, but he didn't wipe them away. "I promise---I'll
remember."

Laeuc shifted beside him and put an arm around his son's shoulders.
Piaerre leaned against his father and watched the night fly by.

* * *

Incredibly, Piaerre must have dozed for a moment, because he opened his
eyes with a start. Goats were bleating to one another faintly below,
which meant they were already above Forecastle Road. As they flew
through the night, he remembered a picture he had once seen of a pearl
diver floating beside a coral reef off the coast of Barra Bantang.
Avaunt loomed over the Presumption like that reef, gray and black in the
moonlight. The braided pines on its flanks watched them pass, solemn and
menacing; a lonely sickle-wing bat flitted across their path with a
sound like crumpling paper.

Gaeston was the first to speak. "He'll be missed."

Laeuc nodded heavily. Piaerre felt his father's chest inflate, then
heard him sigh, long and shaky. "He will."

Gaeston shifted on the plank seat. "What do you think they'll do to
Vurt?"

Laeuc's arm tightened around his son's shoulders. "I don't know."

Piaerre shook off his father's. Saving Avaunt from the Hett seemed like
a small things compared to whether or not his grandfather was still
alive.

"Look on the bright side," Thomas said. He was sitting at the stern, one
hand on the rudder, the other palm-up in his lap. Every few moments his
fingers twitched, whether because he was casting a spell, or because
they were falling asleep, Piaerre couldn't tell. "Fewer of you does mean
less chance of being spotted."

Gaeston's grip tightened on his spear. "It doesn't bother you at all,
does it?" he said levelly. "Them being dead."

"Don't say that!" Piaerre snapped. "And don't tell me to shush," he
added petulantly as his father made a soothing noise, instantly hating
himself for sounding like a child.

Thomas jerked his chin at Piaerre. "Look in the cabin, would you? On the
shelf, port side from the door. There's a jar a little larger than your
two fists, with a lid. Bring it to me."

Piaerre stood, grabbing the bracket atop the boat's small cabin to
steady himself. The door folded inward in the middle like a book. He
stuck his head inside, blinking in the soft red glow of a dayglass
lantern whose cover had been lifted by a string attached to the door.
Why red? he wondered. Red was the cheapest stuff there was; surely a
magician like Thomas could afford better?

The cabin's walls were lined with shelves from floor to ceiling. Boxes,
jars, bottles, and books stood side by side, held in place by fine silk
nets. As he reached for the nearest shelf to steady himself, a small
ceramic turtle tried to hide behind a larger inanimate one. "Sh,"
Piaerre said softly. "I won't hurt you."

The jar was where Thomas had said it would be. It vibrated faintly in
Piaerre's hand. He poked his head back through the door and held it up.
"This one?"

"Yes, thank you." Keeping one hand on the *Presumption*'s rudder, he
took the jar from Piaerre, clamped it between his knees, and twisted the
lid. A pair of glowing dots shot out and whirled around around.

"What in the hells are those?" Gaeston demanded.

"They're from the East Pole," Thomas said as the buzzing points of light
circled him. "Aren't they marvelous? They're drawn to power, like bees
to nectar. If anyone's working a spell up here tonight, these little
darlings will find them."

Thomas whistled two notes, high then low, and pointed at the mountain
beside them. Buzzing furiously, the fireflies dashed away into the
night.

With a twitch of his hand, the *Presumption* heeled sharply. "Hoy!" the
Avauntois exclaimed, grabbing for handholds.

"Saints and sweet onions!" Gaeston swore. "Warn a man the next time you
do that, will you? Or we'll be getting off a lot sooner than we'd like."

"My apologies, of course," Thomas said without taking his eyes off the
receding specks of light. "It would probably best if you all held onto
something for the next little while. I don't want to lose them."

The fireflies darted here and there, exploring each crack and crevice in
the mountainside. Sometimes they got so far ahead of the *Presumption*
that Thomas had to whistle them back. Twice, they disappeared completely
into the mountain, only to re-emerge moments later to continue their
search. On the third time, they vanished.

"Here," Thomas said, passing the jar to Piaerre. "You see the hole in
the side? Twist the lid. No, slowly." The other Avauntois watched as
Piaerre obeyed.

The hole in the lip of the jar was as small around as his little finger.
There was a matching hole in the lid. When he lined the two up, a single
firefly shot out into the night, then a second. Piaerre hastily twisted
the lid back to block their escape.

Thomas swung the rudder over to send the *Presumption* chasing after the
glowing dots. "Now, here's the plan," he said. "When we get close, I'll
let you off, then fly on to draw their attention. I don't know how many
of them there'll be, but it's imperative that you get the stone and get
away as quickly as you can."

Gaeston muttered something under his breath. "Was there a question?"
Thomas asked.

"I said, it doesn't sound like much of a plan to me."

"It's as much of one as I have," the magician replied testily.
"Piaerre?"

As Piaerre turned the jar's lid to free another firefly, Gaeston and
Armaend strung their bows. There was nothing for Laeuc and Donaien to do
except stand their spears in front of them and wait. The only sound was
the sail snapping in the wind.

"And another, please," Thomas said a few minutes later. Piaerre released
it carefully. Instead of racing straight ahead, it circled the mast,
then shot away to starboard, straight up the side of the mountain.

"Hang on," the magician warned. The *Presumption* swung away from the
mountain, then rolled on her side as Thomas doubled them back on their
course. For a brief moment, Piaerre was looking straight down at the
mountain, as if it were level ground.

"Where's it going?" Gaeston demanded.

"I don't know." For the first time, Thomas sounded unsure of himself.
"But someone must be---"

*Whoomp!* Somewhere high above them, orange light flared and died. "Oh
saints," Piaerre whispered. He grabbed his father's sleeve. "It's
banefire! Paere, it's banefire!"

"It most certainly is," Thomas said through gritted teeth. The
*Presumption* heeled and slowed.

"What are you doing?" Gaeston asked as the boat drifted closer to the
mountain.

"Letting you off," the magician replied shortly.

"What?!"

*Whoomp!* Another burst of fire lit the sky above them. A moment later,
the sharp tang of burning pine caught inside Piaerre's throat.

"I said, I'm letting you off," Thomas snapped. "Laeuc, those branches up
ahead---can you throw a tether around them? Unless you'd rather just
jump?"

Gaeston stood up. The bow in his hands wasn't quite drawn; the arrow
notched in it wasn't quite pointed at Thomas. "Tell me we're close," he
said. "Tell me this is part of your plan."

"I have no idea whether we're close or not," Thomas snapped, his eyes on
the tops of the trees he was steering them toward. "But I am not taking
this boat any closer to that mess than it is right now. Best wishes,
good luck, may your grandchildren's grandchildren all bear your name,
and so on."

Gaeston raised his bow. "Like hell."

Piaerre never found out what would have happened next, because Armaend
shouted, "Look! It's the bookster!"

He whirled around. A familiar lean figure was racing toward them like a
leaf blown by a gale. Moonlight gleamed off his shaven head as he leaped
over a fallen tree, missed his footing, slid, rolled back to his feet,
and came on running once more.

A heartbeat later, his pursuers burst out of the trees behind him, steel
in their hands. As Piaerre watched, one of them knelt and raised a
crossbow. A branch above Razi's head whipped aside as the quarrel struck
it, but the bookster kept running.

And then four soldiers came out of the trees in a tight knot around a
bareheaded man who raised his arms and clapped them together over his
head. *Whoomp!* A ball of fire as big as a house blossomed in the sky
above the fleeing bookster.

"Run! Run!" Piaerre screamed.

Razi didn't need to be told. He dove face-first down the side of the
mountain. Flaming destruction crashed to the ground a hand's breath
behind the soles of his sandals as he crashed through the bushes. Pine
trees exploded as pitch boiled and burst into flame, but he was already
on his feet again, running again.

"He's trapped!" Laeuc shouted, pointing. Dead ahead, the forest ended at
the edge of a cliff.

Piaerre spun around. "Pull in closer!"

The magician held the rudder steady. "No."

Gaeston raised his bow once again. "You heard the boy."

Thomas shook his head. "They'll kill us all," he said steadily.

For a moment, Gaeston didn't move, then--- "No!" Piaerre shouted, as
Gaeston lowered his bow. Without thinking, he threw himself at Thomas.

"Piaerre!" Laeuc shouted, but his son's shoulder had already slammed
into the magician's chest. As Thomas grabbed a guyline to save himself
from falling, Piaerre grabbed the rudder with his left hand. Green
flames spurted up around it, singing his wrist and forearm, but his numb
hand couldn't feel it.

He threw his weight onto the rudder. The *Presumption* tilted sharply.
Donaien's spear clattered to the deck as he grabbed the gunwale with one
hand and Armaend with the other. Gaeston and Laeuc shouted incoherently
as the boat flew straight at the mountain.

"Run!" Piaerre screamed at Razi. "Run!" They weren't turning fast
enough---they weren't going to make it. Without thinking, Piaerre grabbed
the rudder with his right hand and heaved with all his might, gritting
his teeth as fresh spurts of green flame thrust lances of pain into him.

Twenty strides, ten, five---just as Razi threw himself over the cliff,
Thomas pulled Piaerre out of the steering seat. "You idiot!" he shouted,
yanking the rudder as the boat's starboard side scraped against the
mountain. "You've killed us all!"

*Thunk!* A crossbow quarrel sprouted from the deck. Razi hit the sail a
moment later and fell to the deck.

"Oh hells," Gaeston swore. Piaerre whirled around. Standing at the top
of the cliff, the Hett magician raised his hands and brought them
together above his head. As fire bloomed above them, Thomas raised his
own arms and shouted three words.

*Whoomp!* Banefire fell toward them. Piaerre screamed in terror as it
splashed against something invisible a stride above the mast. A roiling
mass of fire slipped around them, past them, fell away behind them as
the *Presumption* fled into the night.

"Razi!" Piaerre shook his father off and knelt beside the bookster. He
shook him. "Razi, wake up. Wake up!"

The bookster groaned and opened his eyes. "*La*..." He coughed and sat up.

"You bastard," Thomas spat coldly behind them. "You unutterable
cake-eating bastard. Do you know what you've done? Do you know what
you've done!?"

"He saved the bookster, that's what he did," Gaeston said.

"I mean to me!" Thomas sobbed. "I can't read! I can't read!" He raised a
fist, opened it, pointed at Piaerre---

---and froze. "Put it away," Gaeston said, his arrow aimed squarely at
Thomas's chest.

"But I can't read," Thomas whispered.

Razi finally managed to stand, if unsteadily. "*La*, that was Idjfikan's
Other Device, then?" He raised his palms. "I am grateful for your
sacrifice, and I am sure Lady Kembe will be as well."

"You can both rot in hell." Tears glistened on the magician's cheeks.

Razi lowered his hands and shrugged. "*La*, perhaps." He nodded to
Piaerre. "Well done."

Piaerre nodded back. The skin on his hands had reddened, as if from a
scalding, but the magical green fire hadn't burned. He looked past his
father at Gaeston. For a moment, their eyes locked, and then Fraederiq's
father looked away.

* * *

"We traveled underground," the bookster told the Avauntois as they flew
through the night. The Hett had taken him through tunnels as busy as an
anthill, intending perhaps to show him just how many of them there were,
and how well prepared. Entire families were working side by side,
scraping the accumulated muck of centuries off the walls, repairing
ancient clockwork, building chicken coops and forges, all in preparation
for whatever was to come next.

Razi didn't tell them how he had escaped from his guards. He didn't
explain the fresh cut on his left cheek, either, or the strip of Hett
uniform wrapped around his right hand, or the Hett knife tucked into his
belt. But he did confirm what Thomas had said: the Hett were about to
begin their Great Work, and it would start with a ceremony at the
mountain's peak that night.

"Not much we can do about it now, is there?" Thomas said venomously.
"After that little episode back there, they'll have a hundred eyes on
the sky. As soon as they see our topsail, they'll hit us with everything
they have. I can't use Idjfikan's twice, you know."

"You won't have to," Razi replied gently. "Get us into the tunnels.
We'll do the rest."

The *Presumption* slid through the night, the men aboard her silent and
watchful as she climbed toward the mountain's peak. They saw hand
lanterns in the forest below them, then a campfire. The soldiers warming
themselves around it grumbled and joked as they whiled away the night.
Donaien picked up his bow at the sound. He and Armaend hadn't said a
word since Thomas's hasty spell had saved them.

"There," Razi said suddenly, pointing. "That one." For a moment Piaerre
saw nothing except another cliff, but then the shadows resolved
themselves. The dark patch directly ahead was too regular to be natural.

Gaeston crouched in the bow as Thomas edged the *Presumption* closer. "A
little more, a little more... Right." He stepped onto the gunwale and took
a long stride over a gallop of empty air into the tunnel mouth.
Steadying himself with one hand, he grabbed the rope Donaien tossed him,
then pulled it taut to upll the *Presumption*'s bowsprit closer.

The boat swayed slightly as the Avauntois made their way forward to
clamber over the gunwale. When Piaerre's turn came, his father said,
"Piaerre?"

"I'll be careful," he promised over his shoulder.

"I know," Laeuc said. "I was just going to say, I'm proud of you. Come
on."

Piaerre swung his legs over the side and took Donaien's hand. His boots
slipped on the time-smooth stone---they kept wanting to slide into the
crook of the sharp vee between the tilted wall and floor.

Donaien, Armaend, and Gaeston already had little hand lamps out, and
were putting on their climbing harnesses. "Here," Laeuc said, handing
Piaerre his. "Tighten it all the way."

"What about you?"

Laeuc held up a tangle of straps and buckles. "I'll use Uyves'." His son
nodded and stepped into the harness's leg loops, then shrugged his arms
into the shoulder straps and buckled them tight.

Razi coiled the rope and tossed it back into the bow. The *Presumption*
drifted away slowly, until the wind bellied her sails and Thomas put his
weight to the rudder. He didn't wave goodbye; neither did the Avauntois.

Gaeston spat on the tunnel floor. "We can't let him have the stone. You
know that, don't you?"

Laeuc nodded. "I know." He looked at Donaien and Armaend, who nodded in
turn.

"Wish the bosun was here," Armaend said.

Gaeston grunted. "Or the dragon." He eyed the bookster, who had looped a
rope taken from Thomas's boat over his shoulders and around his waist.
"Have to do, I suppose. Now, which way?"

In answer, Razi grinned and held up Thomas's jar of fireflies. He
twisted the jar's lid until a single blue-green dot shot out, whizzed
around his head, and zoomed away into the darkness. Without a word
Gaeston followed it, the others falling in behind.

Razi's hand came down on Piaerre's shoulder. "I don't suppose you
thought to bring that bottle I left with you?" he asked quietly. Piaerre
shook his head.

Thirty strides in, the tunnel ended in a tee. One arm dropped to their
left; the other rose to their right. Two rusty iron rails lay parallel,
a thumb apart, on what had been the tunnel's floor. When Razi released
another firefly, it shot up the shaft and out of sight.

Gaeston set his feet against the rail, one above the other, and braced
himself against the wall. With his lamp hung on his belt, he started up
the tunnel, toe-heeling his feet as he walked his hands forward on the
tilted wall.

"Go ahead of me," Laeuc urged. Piaerre nodded. He had to stretch, but he
could reach. He began shuffling upward.

His arms and legs ached, then burned, then settled into the dull
weariness brought on by hard labor that has no end in sight. The moist
air made his shirt stick to him like a moldy leaf; his scalded left arm
alternately itched and throbbed.

Wondering how much further it could be, he leaned sideways to see past
Gaeston. As he did so, his foot slipped. "Whoa!" he exclaimed,
half-sliding, half-rolling down the shaft.

Laeuc grabbed his pant leg as he went by. Piaerre found himself hanging
upside down on his back, one cheek against his father's boot, looking up
into Razi's startled eyes.

"*La*, are you all right?" Razi asked.

"I'm fine," Piaerre lied. He was upside down in a dark tunnel, inside a
mountain flying saints knew where, on his way to steal a magic stone
from an invading army. And if he didn't do something about his bladder,
soon, he'd be embarrassed as well as terrified. "I'm fine."

It only took a moment for him to right himself. He moved more carefully
after that, trying hard to think of nothing beyond the next
muscle-burning step. When he reached the horizontal passage at the top
of the shaft he collapsed, panting in the light of their hand lamps. One
by one the others joined him.

After a few heartbeats, Gaeston pointed at Razi. "Time for another?"

Razi twisted the jar's lid. Two points of light escaped. They circled
each other like sparks rising from a fire, then raced away down the
tunnel. Rolling to his feet, Gaeston took the two halves of his spear
from his pack, screwed the haft together, and followed them. Behind him,
the others followed suit.

A hundred strides, two... Piaerre had no idea what time it was, or what
direction they were heading. Or what they would do when they got there.
"Steal the stone" wasn't much of a plan---not even as much as the heroes
in stories usually had.

Gaeston stopped abruptly and raised his hand. Something was rumbling in
the distance, like thunder that wouldn't stop, or a giant snoring.

"Right," Gaeston whispered. "Armaend, Laeuc, bows out. Donaien, you're
with me. Bookster, you---hells, you do whatever you want."

Piaerre pressed himself against the tilted wall to let the grown-ups
pass. There was a slight breeze, barely enough to stir Piaerre's hair,
but colder than the moist air they had been walking through. It smelled
faintly of oil and wet cinders.

The passage opened onto a room tilted at the same disquieting angle as
everything else inside the mountain. The polished stone reflected the
light from their lanterns. "*La*, allow me," the bookster said. He drew
something from inside his *deel* and threw it against the floor. It
tinkled like breaking glass and started glowing.

"Hoy," Piaerre breathed. The room was enormous---if you put Mamaere
Mayeule's house in one corner, and the Captain's House in the other,
you'd still have room for a sizeable garden between them. The only break
in the polished walls was a square opening opposite them, identical to
the one they had just come through.

They were halfway to it when a whistle blew behind them. "Run!" Gaeston
shouted needlessly. Voices shouted behind them. Piaerre glanced over his
shoulder. Soldiers in steel helmets were spilling out of the tunnel
behind them.

"*Forchem!*" a voice commanded---shoot them! *Thwack! Thwack!* Crossbow
quarrels whistled past Piaerre's ears.

Razi reached the door first. He spun around, shouting, "Through,
through!" as Gaeston and Donaien followed, then Laeuc, and then
Armaend---but no, Armaend was down, tugging weakly at the crossbow bolt in
his side before going limp.

Without thinking, Piaerre skidded to a halt. His father grabbed his arm.
"Come on!" he shouted, yanking him on. They pelted down the corridor ten
strides behind the others. Left, right, right again, to a stairway half
over on its side.

The rumbling suddenly stopped. Razi pulled a dark blue vial from one of
his pockets. "Where is the other?" he demanded.

"They shot him," Laeuc panted. "I think he's dead."

Four heads turned to look at Donaien. He blinked. "What? No. No, he
can't be." He started back the way they had come.

Gaeston grabbed Donaien's sleeve. "Come on," he said roughly. "We have
to keep going."

Donaien knocked his hand away and pushed Laeuc aside. "Armaend!
Armaend!" he shouted as he ran back the way they had come.

"Cake," Gaeston spat. "Come on."

"We can't just leave him!" Laeuc protested.

"Hurry!" Razi ordered. He uncorked the blue vial and let three drops
fall to the floor. Chocolate darkness billowed up where they fell.

They took the stairs in long strides, as if stepping from stone to stone
across a stream. There was a shout behind them, then a cry, then
silence. A moment later Hett voices yelled to one another inside the
dark cloud Razi's potion had made.

"Make ready," Razi said to Laeuc quietly.

"What?"

"He means get your damn bow up," Gaeston hissed, tightening his grip on
his spear. Laeuc nodded jerkily and raised his bow.

One after another, four Hett spilled out of the darkness. They were only
ten strides away---there was no way Laeuc could miss. One, two, three, but
then he fumbled his arrow and the fourth charged. He didn't yell, he
just ran at the point of Gaeston's spear, swinging his sword to knock it
aside, but Gaeston dropped the point and thrust. He twisted the spear to
follow the Hett down, then yanked it free.

One of the Hett that Laeuc had shot struggled to his feet, one hand
holding the arrow in place, the other braced against the wall. Laeuc
raised his bow again, hesitated, and then lowered it as Gaeston growled
and swung his spear like a bat. The Hett fell back to the floor. Laeuc
handed his bow to Piaerre without a word, turned, and threw up.

* * *

And then there was nothing to do but follow the fireflies. Razi armed
himself with a sword taken from one of the dead Hett; he offered another
to Piaerre, who shook his head.

"Those two are still alive," he said shakily, pointing.

Razi shrugged. "*La*, and may they see their grandchildren married. Come
on."

One by one, the bright flying sparks led them up through the mountain,
up toward its peak. The final stretch was a staircase tilted on its side
so that the steps were like the pleats in a giant party streamer. They
didn't speak---what was there to say? Piaerre had no idea what the time
was, but midnight couldn't be far off.

Razi raised his hand to halt them at the top of the stairs, sniffing the
air. Piaerre imitated him. It was fresh, and now that they were stopped,
he could feel a breeze. "Cover your lanterns," the bookster said, low
and urgent. As his eyes adjusted to the sudden darkness, Piaerre could
make out a faint square of lesser darkness to their left.

They inched toward the tunnel mouth in single file. Handing his sword to
Gaeston, Razi laid himself flat on the ground and scuttled forward, his
weight on his fingers and toes. "Come," he whispered a moment later from
outside.

He rose to his feet as the others joined him. They were standing at the
base of a near-vertical cliff spattered with gritty patches of ice that
gleamed in the moonlight. The path beneath their feet had recently been
cleared. Dwarf cedars, none of them taller than Piaerre's waist, clung
to the rocky slope that fell away from it, steeply at first and then
vertically, toward the lights of Forecastle. A few clouds hung in the
distance, too far from the mountain to be disturbed by its bulk.

Above them, Piaerre heard voices---Hett voices---and the universal hammering
and grunting of construction. Something was thudding rhythmically;
something else made a swishing noise every dozen heartbeats or so.

Grim-faced, Razi released one final firefly. It shot halfway up the
cliff, then hung for a moment as if uncertain before reversing its
course. Startled, Piaerre stepped back, bumping into his father, as the
little dot of light flew past them into the tunnel mouth.

"What---" Gaeston started, but Razi put a finger over his lips. They
listened. Nothing, nothing... Footsteps. No, marching---there were people in
the tunnel, coming closer by the heartbeat.

"Duck's luck," Gaeston breathed.

"*La*, let us hope it holds," Razi said softly. "Piaerre---here." He
handed the jar of fireflies to his apprentice, then put his hands
together. As Piaerre stepped into them, the bookster boosted him.
Piaerre dug his fingers into a cleft in the rock face and scrambled up a
couple of strides.

"What's he going to do up there?" Laeuc asked.

"Not get killed," Razi replied shortly. "Take what cover you can. *Sra*
Gaeston, on the right if you please. And you should know, I have never
liked you."

Gaeston pulled up short. "What?"

The bookster grinned. "*La*, at a moment like this, a man should lighten
his soul as much as he can, and there is no one else here to whom I
might confess." He looked up at Piaerre, his grin still on his face,
raised his sword in a graceful salute, and then swept it back to the
ready.

Tramp tramp tramp---the first pair of soldiers stepped out into the night.
Piaerre couldn't see their faces, but one of them had time to make a
jerky grab for his sword before Laeuc's arrow thumped into his leg. His
partner was already falling; Razi was already cutting at the man behind
him as Gaeston shouted, "Avaunt and her captain!" and lunged forward.

Metal rang on metal. Voices shouted. "Drop for the shot!" Laeuc nearly
screamed. "Drop for the weeping shot!" He hesitated another moment, then
struggled up the slope and fired his second arrow point blank at a Hett
who had spilled out of the tunnel. It spanged against the soldier's
breastplate, snapping cleanly in two.

As Laeuc snatched another arrow from the quiver on his hip, the Hett
knocked his bow away to clatter down the mountain with a contemptuous
swipe of his sword. He raised the tip of his blade level with Laeuc's
eyes.

Piaerre's breath caught. "Yield," the Hett ordered. Slowly, shakily,
Laeuc raised his hands.

More Hett boiled out of the tunnel, throwing Gaeston and Razi onto the
path at Laeuc's feet. Razi was up in a heartbeat. Gaeston struggled
woozily, bleeding from a gash across his face, but couldn't keep his
feet under him. Laeuc grabbed his arm to steady him. A soldier punched
the side of his head.

More soldiers, and then---Piaerre swallowed drily. Two Hett in helmets and
armor led by a third with ribbons fluttering on his arm, the two
carrying a pair of bamboo poles between them. Slung between the poles
was a square stone casket an arm's length on a side.

One of the soldiers standing next to the captured Avauntois barked a
question. The officer shook his head. "*Ashenope arra te Uremme Bech
paurenatepe ejo*," he replied---not in cold blood near the Pilot Stone. He
studied Razi for a moment, then waved a hand. "*Keneshwe!*"

As the Hett next to him pulled cords from their belt pouches, the
bookster looked up at Piaerre. "Release them," he said loudly. "Release
them all."

Piaerre stared back, not understanding. "I said, release them!" Razi
repeated urgently. As one of the Hett cuffed him, Piaerre pulled the jar
of fireflies from his jacket pocket and turned it upside down.

A thousand buzzing sparks threw themselves at the casket. The Hett
commander spun, drawing his sword and shouting, turning back just in
time for Razi's elbow to smash into the bridge of his nose. The two Hett
who had been beside him struggled to their feet as the bookster ducked a
hasty sword thrust, kicked a knee, rose spinning to catch an arm---

---and fell to the ground like a wet shirt. Twenty strides up the path,
the gray-robed Hett who had cast the spell lowered her arm. She strode
forward, her hand on the shoulder of the soldier beside her.

"*Deshwe!*" Piaerre looked down. Two crossbows were pointed at him; two
other Hett had their swords drawn, and looked as though they would like
nothing better than an excuse to use them. Shaking, he climbed down a
stride, then jumped.

He landed just as the blind Hett magician reached Razi. "Auedje ne
atarappa paurenatepe ke fe iuadje te?" she demanded coldly.

The bookster had managed to roll onto his back, but was still unable to
rise. "*La*, my apologies, but I don't speak---"

"Liar," the Hett magician said in Avauntois. She spat on the ground
beside him. "Murderer. Tell me, how many men have you killed tonight?
Eight? Ten?"

"I regret that," the bookster replied calmly. "Truly, I do."

"Tell it to their families," she snarled. The soldier beside her put his
hand on her arm. She shook him off. She was younger than she had first
seemed, Piaerre realized---probably not much older than QueÃ§enne. "I am
tired of my people dying, do you understand that? I am tired of people
who have done no harm in this world being beaten by drunks, or driven
from their homes by mobs, or robbed blind by petty lordlings who know
that no one will defend them. Your mistress has done nothing to help
us---nothing---and neither has anyone else, so now we are going to help
ourselves."

"I grieve for your wounds," Razi said. "But what was done to you does
not make right what you would do here."

"No it doesn't," she agreed coldly. "But it will stop it from ever
happening again. *Etne aue petneshas she!*"

"No!" Piaerre shouted as four Hett bent down and grabbed Razi's arms and
legs. "You can't---not in cold blood! Not near the Pilot Stone!"

"He won't be anywhere near the stone," the magician said, her voice as
cold as the sky above them.

The soldiers carried Razi a few strides down the steep slope. Grunting,
they swung him back and forth, counting, "*Ett... tven... trea!*" and threw
him over the side.

Piaerre barely noticed his hands being bound behind his back. He
stumbled up the path in a daze behind his father and Gaeston. First
Fraederiq, then Uyves, his papaere, Armaend and Donaien, and now Razi...
How had it all gone so wrong? How could they all be---

"Saints love us," his father said. Piaerre looked up. They had reached
the peak of the mountain.

Glowing plates of dayglass illuminated the scene in front of them, each
larger than any piece Piaerre had ever seen. An area the size of the
market square in Forecastle had been scraped clean. In its center was a
flat-topped stone pyramid, a flight of steps leading up one side. Atop
it stood a statue of a man with ram's horns. Four elderly Hett in gray
robes waited patiently on the stairs, light glinting from the iron
marbles that lay where their eyes should have been.

Strange machines had been assembled on the rocks around the pyramid.
They were made of gold and glass, of granite, of brightly-colored coral
and enormous bones, all connected by gear trains and cables. As the
Avauntois stared in horror, an eerie blue light rose from one of the
machines like steam from a kettle. A face, ten times life size and too
narrow to be human, suddenly appeared above another, its mouth open as
if to laugh or scream, then vanished. As it did so, the rumbling beneath
their feet suddenly stopped.

Their captors halted them a dozen strides from the nearest machine. The
two carrying the casket hurried forward to the pyramid's base. Light
swirled around the machines in all the colors of the week, purple and
blue, green and yellow, orange, and deep, blood red.

Piaerre could hear the machines now. They were singing to each other,
great long notes that ran from bone-tingling bass to fluting whistles
that made his ears ring. The air tingled as the light folded around
itself and became a shining emptiness too bright to look at. The
magicians were chanting in time with the machines' rhythmic pulse. The
light grew brighter, dazzling Piaerre even through his eyelids.

And then the magician on the bottom step opened the casket's lid. The
light that shone from inside was unbearable. It wasn't too hot, or too
bright: it was too real. Piaerre threw up his arm to cover his face, but
the light was still too much. It was shining right through him---right
through the whole world.

As one, the magicians on the stage cried out. Piaerre lowered his arm
just in time to see the statue inhale the light. The whole world held
its breath for a moment, and then the statue opened its eyes and tilted
its head to one side. Â«Finally.Â» The word appeared inside Piaerre's
head, like a sliver of ice dropped into a pool of water.

The Hett raised their arms. "Aya! Aya! Aya!" they shouted. "It is done!
It is done! It is done!"

"My lord." Tears ran down the Hett magician's face, but her voice was
strong. "My lord, welcome. Welcome back."

Â«Who are these?Â» The statue's thought somehow took in the Avauntois.

"Unhearing ones, my lord. They tried to prevent your return."

Â«They failed.Â»

"Yes, my lord. Do you wish them returned to the earth?"

Â«No.Â» The statue slowly swept its gaze around the chamber, taking in the
now-silent machines, the awestruck Hett, and the silent, watchful
balconies. Â«This place is a mess.Â»

"Yes, my lord."

Â«It needs mending.Â»

"*Yes*, my lord." The magician's voice was exultant.

The statue's eyes were steel marbles, Piaerre noticed. Even without
that, and the horns coiled on either side of its head where its ears
should have been, and its hairlessness, and the complete lack of
anything male or female between its legs, it still wouldn't have passed
for human. It was too perfect.

Â«This ship is damaged.Â» Each word came perfectly formed into Piaerre's
mind. Â«It needs mending. There are deserts where there should be
gardens. The moon has strayed from its course.Â»

"Slow poisons rot the heart of the world." The Hett magician spoke the
words aloud in time with the statue. Others joined in, some weeping with
joy. "Rivers run outside their courses, and monsters roam free. We must
mend what is broken."

Â«We must mend what is broken.Â» the statue agreed. Its steel gaze fell on
the Avauntois. Â«Go and tell the world. The Great Work begins.Â»

One moment they were standing in the heart of the mountain. The next,
they were at the top of Slip Street, just outside the gate of the
Captain's House. "Hoy!" Gaeston grabbed the gate to steady himself.
"What in all hells was that!?"

"I think it was an Angel," Piaerre said, dazed.

"But they're dead!"

Piaerre shrugged. "Not any more."

Anything he might have added was cut off as the ground lurched, throwing
them to the ground. Slowly but inexorably, the mountain began to turn
over.

*Here ends the first part of The Fall of the Flying Mountain.*

> *Greg Wilson*
>
> *October 2002 --- April 2006*

