<!-- start: 2017-11-01 -->
<!-- target: 5000 -->
<!-- deadline: 2017-12-20 -->

# Six Letters (None Complete)<br>Greg Wilson

## First Letter

Anyalcze<br>
The Sign of Three Pears<br>
17 Chalcedony 1223

My dearest brother,

I kiss you upon your left cheek, I kiss you upon your right.  And with
formality satisfied, I ask you, where is my money?  You promised you
would send enough to redeem me from this garlicky wasteland! Oh, I
weep, brother, I weep with desperation.  We are Sarkoszkys, you and I;
how is the world fallen, that one of our family should be reduced
to---

Oh, I cannot put it to paper.  I can barely *say* it, though I must
hear it, five mornings a week.  "Good morning, Your Grace.  Your
*tutor* is here." That word, "tutor".  It is an iron spike, no, a pair
of them, one hammered into each ear with tradesmanlike gusto.  I swear
in blood, each time I hear it, I am *this* close to throwing myself
off the walls of His so-called Grace's so-called castle from shame.

And the girl herself---oh, brother, brother, put out of your mind the
buxom Praczny maidens (so soon and so inevitably unmaidened, eh?) in
those slim volumes we discovered hidden beneath account books in the
further corners of Father's library.  Her "Grace" has the physique of
a lowland ox, and not half the wit.  She can barely speak her own
language; such decency as this place has left me forbids me from
describing what she does to *ours*.  Never have I loved Uwsian more
than now, when I must listen---no, must *collaborate*, may all the
unnamed saints forgive me---while my dullard pupil flays and quarters
the language you and I have sworn our lives to, then craps upon its
wretched remains.

To paint salt on the burn, the hopes I was so foolish as to express in
my last letter regarding her brother have been slaughtered most
cruelly.  (Did it reach you?  If so, then *where is my money!?*) He
has intelligence, yes, but it is of a low and cunning sort,
unilluminated by any real spark of wit.  I admit---I freely
admit---that I mis-read him.  Oh, I can hear your guffaws now, you
churl.  Me, mis-read a boy?  Yes.  That is how cloddish this
clod-trap, crapulent wilderness has made me.  Oh, brother, brother,
you must rescue me.  You must, you must...

But the boy.  He---

My apologies.  The duke's courier rose from his table then, as if to
depart.  As it is my plan to slip this letter unnoticed into the
packet he carries (as I am *too impoverished* to pay him to carry it
for me), I was about to pursue some stratagem, I know not what, to
delay him until I could sign it, but on event, he sought merely to
relieve himself, and has now returned.  I think him no keener to be
out in the rain this night than the innkeeper's pigs, which are
farting and snoring contentedly in front of the fire.  You see what I
am reduced to?

So, the boy.  It wasn't the usual.  No, no, not this time.  *This*
time, it was about money.  There, I've said it again.  Money.  Money,
money, money.  I needed some, but had none, and thought to enlist the
duke-in-waiting to remedy that, that---drought?  Shortcoming?  Bah.  I
cannot even find words any longer.  No matter.  In brief, in place of
verb declensions and well-rolled R's, I filled his lessons with tales
of derring-do, of swashes buckled and monsters slain, taking care
always to point out the "skills" a true hero must have.  Not just
swordplay---no, no (here, I shake my head), not just the parrying of
one's enemy's blows, and the hewing of his limbs.  Why, the great
heroes of old were also adept at climbing ropes, picking locks,
skulking and scurrying and all manner of thieverous what-not.  Upon my
blood, yes, they were!

And of course, from there it was small coin to persuade him (but never
in so many words) that a hero-to-be like himself had a right, nay, a
*duty*, to acquire said skills.  And how better to do it than by
filching a few odds and ends from his sister's chambers?  Oh, but his
eyes lit up at that.  His sister, whose impending marriage to some
third-rate cast-off south-end-of-nowhere lordling would leave him a
guest in his own home; his sister, who wore more gold on two fingers
than he had to his name; his sister, who called him "darling Pupsy" in
front of his friends on his fifteenth nameday.  Oh yes, he---

Another false alarm.  The courier stirred once again, I thought to
leave, but he only wished to scratch the ears of one of the
innkeeper's pigs in order to disguise a release of flatulence.  Pfah!
Have I mentioned the garlic these people eat?  Brother, dear brother,
please, I will shave my head and swear my soul to the Balance if
Father demands it, only send me twenty bezels for the carriage home,
and lodging fit for a gentleman on the way...

So, again, the boy.  I thought him caught, like a sparrow in a
spider's web.  He would do the skulking and scurrying (his heart
pitter-pat the while, I am sure, to be in the Women's Yard uninvited,
the chopsman's ax his reward if caught), and I would dispose of
whatever filchings he brought me.  Of course, I didn't tell him that
outright.  No, my plan was that I would, with the aid of a rogue I met
under circumstances I shall *not* trust to paper, transform Her Bovine
Grace's jewelry into more negotiable assets, then offer the boy half.
If he accepted, so well for him; if he refused, so well for me, as I
could always *claim* he had accepted it.

But speak not for the snake, eh?  Speak not for the weeping snake.
The boy---

---

## Second Letter

Pelkoyniskiiy Mansion<br>
Nevy Rav<br>
8<sup>th</sup> Sapphire, 1224<sup>th</sup> Year Since<br>

Sir Anton Usrachiakov Berion<br>
Knight Ordinary<br>
Polgotseny Town

Respected Sir Anton,

I kiss you upon your left cheek, I kiss you upon your right.

I am writing with regard to the letter enclosed, which was included in
a packet of correspondence My Lord was honored to receive from His
Grace, the Duke of Anyalcze-in-Praczedt, on or about 15<sup>th</sup> Amethyst
of last year.  As you will no doubt have noticed, while the letter is
addressed to a member of your household, the seal upon it has been
broken.  What further mundane inspection may not reveal is that the
letter has in part been read by myself.

For this, I offer my most sincere apology.  I assure you, no Pelkoy
would ever intentionally read the correspondence of any other
gentleman, or of any he knew to be in the service, standing, or employ
of a gentleman.  How, then, did the seal come to be broken, and how
then did I come to read the letter's first part?

It was thus: the packet was delivered by His Grace's courier in
mid-Malachite, on the day after the first great storm of this past
winter.  As I am sure you recall, the storm was fiercer than usual for
its season---much fiercer than My Lord's magician, the respected
Urptenchauenchut, had foreseen.  Our household was therefore less well
prepared than it would have been in prior days, when less trust was
put in such persons.

It was the work of several days to direct our peasants and serfs as
they brought in the last of their crops and cattle, re-roofed their
dwellings, &c., during which time the packet was neglected.  If I
recall correctly, I did not even bring it to My Lord's attention at
that time, believing it would be spring at the earliest before the
courier would be able to return to Anyalcze-in-Praczedt with a reply.

At some point during those days, one of my servants placed some
accounts I had requested on top of the packet, which was waiting for
me on my desk.  I have whipped him for his error, but that does not
change the fact that the packet was not then opened until three days
past.

I trust you will therefore understand that I was in something of a
temper when I finally returned to reading the packet's contents.  The
bulk of it was commercial correspondence, which I perused with no more
enthusiasm than a gentleman ought to bring to such an endeavor.  (I
should say now, before it slips my leash: an ironmason in Polgotseny
named Kariadanov may be employing Hett in the guise of honest
tradesmen.  You may wish to investigate...) The rest of the packet
comprised revisions to a contract of marriage which My Lord and His
Grace have been negotiating these past two years, and a dozen perfumed
letters from His Grace's eldest daughter to her prospective intended,
which I gave immediately to My Lord's sister for inspection, as she
will most probably accompany My Lord's son to Anyalcze should the
marriage be agreed.

It was then that I made the error for which I have already offered my
apology.  My Lord's sister had taken the unasked liberty of opening
the letters from His Grace's eldest daughter, and insisted upon
reading aloud some passages whose tangled grammar she found
particularly amusing.  While so distracted, I took the next letter
from the packet and broke its seal with first inspecting the address.
I then read the first page, and part of the second, without truly
taking in what was before my eyes.

Of course, I ceased as soon as it was clear that the letter was not
intended for My Lord or any of his household.  However, My Lord's
sister noticed my discomfort, for she ceased her recitation and asked
me what was wrong.  Refusing to accept my demurrals, she drew from me
a precis of what I had accidentally read.  I confess, I was not as
loathe to confide in her as a gentleman in my position perhaps should
have been, as I of course recognized the address on the letter.
Having seen a portion of its contents, I realized I had inadvertently
placed myself in the sort of delicate quandary which are more properly
a lady's province.

I beseech you not to take offense if I tell you, plainly, one
gentleman to another, that your grandson's hasty departure from
Polgotseny these three summers past is well known among My Lord's
sister's circle.  She informed me the greater part of her
acquaintances believed the cause to be gambling debts, though some
claimed (solely out of malice, I am sure) that one of your neighbors
had sworn revenge against him for some unknown act.  On that basis,
she suggested that the letter should be delivered to you, rather than
to its intended, in order to apprise you of its author's whereabouts
and current state.

I protested, of course, informing her that I felt it improper for one
gentleman to traffic with another's correspondence in any such manner.
At this, she rephrased her suggestion as instruction, stating that it
was in fact our duty to put your interests, as the head of your
family, above those of your grandsons.  I will confess, I was moved by
her argument, imagining what My Lord would desire if he should ever be
blessed with grandchildren, and if they should ever place his family
in such a position.

Thus, the letter, and its reaffixed seal.  And also, at the request of
My Lord's sister, a suggestion, which she likens to "turning this
grain of sand into a pearl" (a favorite phrase of My Lord's magician,
the respected Urptenchauenchut).  As I am in your honor-debt for my
actions regarding this letter, I trust I may broach it plainly.

As you are aware, My Lord's lands have been increasingly troubled by
those bandits who increasingly infest the lands forming the border
between southern Uws, and northern Praczedt.  This situation is in
fact what has precipitated his consideration of marriage between his
family, and that of His Grace the Duke of Anyalcze.  While the
pedigree of the latter is no better than it should be, his lands are
the sole island of

---

## Third Letter

Near Burning Rock<br>
Midsummer or nearly, 1224<br>
Sweet's words by Buckle's hand<br>

Mistress,

Excuse my handwriting, please.  The master says, something still hunts
us.  I say, I do not see its shadow, I do not smell its breath.  The
master says, horses know more than hairless monkeys what it is to be
hunted, so I still my mouth and write what he tells me to.

The letters with this came to us in Nevy Rav.  The master did not wish
to winter there, but there was an early storm.  I found work in the
Graf's stables to pay for the master's hay and barley.  It would not
have been enough, but some coin was left from the business in Vnir.
(I write for myself, I was only asked to sell the master four times in
five months.  He said he was not offended, what do Uwsians know of
horses, but that is the real reason he wanted away at first melt.)

When I told the stablemistress we would leave, she ordered me to the
postmaster.  "There is a law," she said, that every traveler must
carry mail if there is mail to carry.  She said there would be silver
in it.  The master and I wanted only to be over the mountains in Darp,
but it would have drawn eyes, a penniless Darpani saying no to silver.
And as you have said many times, "There is no letter not worth
reading."

(The master asks, can I write that to show he is being sarcastic?  I
say, I can if you will walk more slowly, to not jostle my pen.  The
master says, if I walk slowly, we will not be hunted any longer.  We
will be dinner.)

The postmaster asked me which road we would take.  I said south, to
the Nettelin, then upriver through the Brumosos to Darp.  He found
three letters that wished to go that way, then told me to come back
the morning after next for more.  I said, to be away now, today.  He
said no, there is a law, the postmaster must have the criers announce
mail for the south, and I must wait one full day, dawn to dawn, after
their cry.  I argued and pleaded, but he said, there is a law.  He
gave me three silver-heart pennies for my trouble, though.

(Mistress, the postmaster of Nevy Rav is half-Darpani.  He has the
Five Hands on his left forearm, and the Arrow Eagle on his right, but
no other tattoos we could see.  He is fond of drink, but not a
drunkard, and does not seem to gamble.  The master says, he would
probably not serve you knowingly, but someone in need could play on
his feelings for the clan and tribe he has never known.  Also, he
keeps mail in wooden boxes on a shelf in his office.  The locks on the
boxes are simple, and I did not smell any magic.)

We waited the rest of the day, then the next.  I slept in the stable
with the master to save two of the three pennies.  The stablemistress
came to me both nights, but I pretended not to understand her.  On the
dawn, we returned to the postmaster.  There were no more letters, so
we took the three, and a letter with the postmaster's mark to say we
had not stolen them, and left the city by the cattle gate.

A man was waiting for us there, horsed, in furs, with his hood pulled
low.  The master says I should write his name carefully: Sir Georgiy
Chorichiakov Pelkoy, Knight Jurist in service of the Graf.  The master
says you will know this name from prior times.

He was one of those who had asked to buy the master, so I thought his
aim was to steal what I would not sell.  I put my hand to my bow, but
he raised empty hands to greet me.  "Clean luck that I have not missed
you," he said, for he had a letter he wanted me to carry south.  He
gave it to me with a good half bezel of silver, and a promise of a
full bezel more upon its delivery to a knight in Polgotseny.

I took his letter and gave him a horseback bow.  "I will deliver it,"
I said, but I did not say to who.  There were others on the road then,
so he left me.

(Mistress, I thought the master would reveal his Gift by laughing.
Tell her the knight was *skulking*, he says.  (I have tried to write
that word sarcastically.) Tell her Sir Georgiy Chorichiakov seemed
bursting to ask, "What is the secret password?")

The master had me ride off the Great Coast Road onto an oxcart track
that night to make camp, and then open the letter and read it to him.
The seal was easily lifted.  There were two hairs inside the letter,
by chance or so that the intended reader could know if it had been
opened.  (The master says, or as a signal, like hunters will tie knots
in grass.  We are moving again, more quickly than before.  If the
master begins to trot, I will put this aside.  May the First Woman and
the Last Man shelter our souls.)

The writing in the first letter is that of a young man with too much
schooling, Uwsian, and right-handed.  It is very good paper, but cheap
ink and a poor pen.  The paper smells of flowers.  At the master's
instruction, I left this as it was.

The second letter is in a stronger hand, also on good paper,
unscented.  At the master's instruction, I made a clean copy of its
first part, as far as the stanza beginning, "As you are aware." This,
and what follows, is the master's invention.  He says to tell you, it
was the best he could come up with in the middle of nowhere without
ever having met the man, and if it trips up another of your plans, it
is your own fault for not telling him what was really going on when
you sent us here.  (Mistress, please forgive the fire in his
words---being hunted again has put his nerves on edge.)

A late storm made us five weeks to Polgotseny instead of three.  I
swear in blood, the letters were against my skin those thirty days, or
else under the master's saddle when I bathed.  The copies too were
hidden as you have taught us, but when we came to

---

## Fourth Letter

His Highness, Evan Prince Unsworth (Renounced)<br>
King Edward's College<br>
Ensworth<br>
19<sup>th</sup> Malachite, 1251<sup>st</sup> Year Since<br>

The Lady Kembe<br>
Her residence<br>
The Royal City of Ossisswe

Most honored lady,

Please excuse my audacity in approaching you, even at so great a
distance, without prior announcement, agreement, or introduction.  I
can only surmise how busy someone with your wide and varied interests
must be; I trust you will forgive my intrusion once I make the nature
of my business plain.

I am writing to you at this time because I have recently come into
possession of certain letters whose disposition I believe may be of
substantial---nay, of *material*---interest to you.  It is my belief
that public knowledge of these letters would be deleterious to Your
Grace's reputation; I am therefore hopeful that some mutually
agreeable arrangement for their disposition or destruction can be
found.

The matter is this: for the past year, I have been preparing an
Argument to place before the Governors of the University, in the hope
that they will consider it worthy cause to admit me to the rank of
Scholar Ordinary.  At the advice of Her Grace, the Balance
Petcharatiriv, who has presided over this College for the past six
years, I selected as the subject of my Argument the causes and conduct
of the rebellion in Uws in YS 1224-26.  "Half of the survivors wound
up here when it was all over," (if I may quote Her Grace Petcharatiriv
directly), "And half of them are still alive, so why not ask them what
they thought it was all about?"

Accordingly, I have spent these past months traipsing from one bastion
of tattered grandeur to another in order to ask a succession of exiled
landgrafs and faded knights-justiciar whether they had felt threatened
by Yuriy II Barsadov's administrative reforms, how they had first
learned that the Pelkoys and Berions had raised the old Sarkoszy
banner, why they had decided to put on rebel ribbons, &c.

It was on one of these visits that I came into possession of the
letters to which I alluded earlier, the first pages of which I have
faithfully copied and appended to this letter of mine.  In between
draughts of a particularly pungent home-brewed *otrava*, their owner
informed me that in the years prior to the rebellion, it had been his
honor to serve as a knight-warden in the Pelkoy domains in the south
of Uws.  Early in 1224, his patrol intercepted a Darpani courier, in
whose possession he discovered several letters he felt would be of
interest to his lord, the Knight Justiciar Sir Georgiy Chorichiakov.
Upon his return to Nevy Rav, however, he discovered that Sir Georgiy
had raised the flag of rebellion.  In the confusion, he claims, he set
the letters aside, only thinking of them again these twenty-five years
later when prompted by my questions.

The letters are, to wit:

Item, from the mysterious "Gentleman" who authored the infamous
travelogue, *The Customs, Laws, and Language of Northern Praczedt: A
Guide For Those So Fortunate As To Have Been Born Elsewhere*.  This
appears to prove that the "Gentleman" was Sir Josep Antonikov Pelkoy,
later husband of Her Grace the Duchess of Anyalcze.

Item, from Sir Georgiy Chorichiakov, conspirator and rebel, to Sir
Anton Berion, the same, verifying the authenticity of the first
letter, and in passing rehearsing the matter which formed the basis
for the rebellion, to wit: that lawlessness had increased under the
reign of the Barsadovs.

Item, and of most immediate interest, from a Gifted horse named Sweet,
put to paper with interjections by someone named Buckle (most probably
the Darpani courier whom the letter's possessor intercepted).  The
letter's intended recipient is not named, but is addressed as
"Mistress", a title by which, as all Cherne knows, agents in your
employ often use for you.

This third letter is what has prompted mine to you.  If you were in
fact the one for whom the letter was written, it suggests that you did
not simply take an interest in the events of YS 1224, as you said in
your communication to His Majesty Yuriy II after the rebels' defeat.
Instead, it appears that you were in fact *inciting* the rebels by
intercepting and altering their communication.  Since reading these
letters, I have found it impossible not to speculate on how His
Majesty's heirs would react to this knowledge.  At the least,

---

## Fifth Letter

King Edward's College<br>
Ensworth<br>
Yellowsday, 3<sup>rd</sup> Tourmaline, 1252<sup>nd</sup> Year Since

The Lady Kembe,<br>
Her residence,<br>
The Royal City of Ossisswe

Honored lady,

Thank you for your message of this morning.  Please excuse my use of
soldierly language---I did not expect words to write themselves in the
fog on my shaving mirror, and did myself a very minor injury with my
razor when they appeared.  By way of apology, I hope you will accept
the bottle of apple brandy that accompanies this letter; it was laid
down in the last year of His Majesty my grandfather's time, and Her
Grace the Balance Petcharatiriv tells me that it may bring back fond
memories for you.

Thank you also for the packet of letters which I found on my desk upon
arriving at the University.  I agree, the one purporting to be from me
is an excellent forgery: the stationary bears the correct watermark,
and the hand is accurate.  Having made such an effort, it is peculiar
that its author would commit the simple errors of putting my name at
the head of the address, and incorrectly addressing you as "Most
honored lady."  Still, as Balance Petcharatiriv often tells me, no one
was ever bankrupted by underestimating the intelligence of his
fellows...

In answer to your questions:

Item, yes, someone *did* burst into flames a little after noon today,
to wit, my tutor, a Scholar Stipendiary named André Ghislaine é
Marcque.  He came to Ensworth from Seyferte to study after the end of
hostilities eight years ago.  I have spoken to my father's Minister of
Rumors; she assures me that her agents never had any indication that
*Sra* André was engaged in any improper activity.

Item, no, I do not recall *Sra* André's mood being particularly dark
over the past few months.  While I agree that Ensworth's winters may
seem damp and gray to someone accustomed to those of the south, he had
weathered the previous seven with no apparent ill effect.  And if I
may be so bold, I would also venture that if he *did* find our weather
or our food as unbearable as you suggested, a man of his intelligence
could undoubtedly have found a more reliable way of committing suicide
than attempting to blackmail a magician.

Item, no, setting those two possibilities aside, I do not have any
thoughts on why he would have written the letter.  Our relationship
had been increasingly strained---he did not approve of me making
events "recent, and therefore trivial" (in his phrase) the subject of
my Argument.  However, I find it hard to believe that even as
dedicated a scholar as he would consider this cause to attempt murder,
albeit indirectly.  I have asked the Minister of Rumors to continue
inquiries, and she has assured me she will do so.

Having answered your questions, I would now be grateful if you would
be willing to entertain some of my own.  From the scorch marks on the
forged letter, Her Grace infers that you used it to work this
morning's spell.  (She wishes me to ask whether it was Idjfikan's Long
Reach, or the Bantangui variant of Moescher's Immolation.) Setting
that aside, I must confess I found the other three letters
fascinating.  Do you believe any of them to be a true copy of an
authentic original?  Fully a dozen of the University's junior scholars
have presented an Argument at one time or another regarding the
identity of the author of *A Guide For Those So Fortunate As To Have
Been Born Elsewhere*; if the first letter is not a forgery, it would
put that matter to rest.  The second letter would completely refute my
Argument that the rebellion of 1224 was a reflexive, uncoordinated
thing, while the third would, as *Sra* André suggested, cast a rather
different light upon those events.  If

---

## Sixth Letter

Ossisswe<br>
Greensday 22 Sapphire '52

His Highness, Evan Prince Ensworth (Renounced)<br>
King Edward's College<br>
The University, Ensworth

Your Highness,

Received yours of 3 Tourm. 52 this morning.  First page intact but
stained, all other pages missing entirely; deduce from this that a
bottle of fifty-year-old brandy was too great a temptation for at
least one courier on the road between Ensworth and Ossisswe.  Doubt
anyone at this end would be brave enough to open something addressed
to me; suggest inquiry at your end, followed by whipping.

Regarding questions in yours, trust you will not be offended if I
choose not to answer them directly.  I receive more inquiries
regarding historical, legal, and genealogical matters with each
passing year.  Were I to answer even a tenth part of them, I would
have no waking hours left to devote to the events of the present day.

More importantly, even if I were to answer, would you actually know
any more than you do now?  If I told you that a Gifted horse named
Sweet was doing my bidding in Uws at the time of the most recent
rebellion, would you then know the truth?  No, you would not---you
would then have to ask yourself whether I was trying to mislead you
for some purpose of my own.  (You would most certainly ask yourself
that if I said I did *not* have an agent in Uws at the time, would you
not?)

Of course, once you enter this jungle, you are lost.  Was the first
letter a forgery?  Some scoundrel could have impersonated *Sra* Josep
Antonikov Pelkoy in order to wheedle money from his brother.  Or
someone closer to home could have forged the letter in order to
embarrass the family.

Or perhaps the first letter is authentic, and the second is a forgery.
Or perhaps the first two are authentic, but the third was a plant by
that prissy toad Yuriy, to convince disaffected noblemen like Sir
Anton Usrachiakov (who was a dull knife, though brave) that I was
meddling in Uwsian affairs.  I'm sure your lessons have taught you
that nothing stops the Uwsians fighting amongst themselves except the
prospect of fighting someone else.

Or perhaps *your* letter is a blind for some secret communication
unrecognized by you.  Petcharatiriv was a member of my household for
several years; I do not need magic to know that she cast an eye over
it, suggested phrases, had you trim a word here and insert one
there---she is your teacher, and she has no doubt cautioned you that
royal haughtiness is best set aside when speaking to me.  That bottle
of brandy---was the idea of sending it truly yours, or did it grow
from a seed she planted in your mind?  Perhaps it means, "The king is
to be assassinated," or, "I have run out of pistachios, please send
some more." You cannot know, can you?

And so, you turn to me.  Kembe will know---if there was a king or
coincidence involved, Kembe must have had a hand it it, so ask her.  I
have become a substitute for scholarship, young prince, an ore from
which historians hope to smelt knowledge, and it wearies me.

So, ask yourself, is the story complete?  Or am I fabricating to some
end, as the true author of the letters you (or someone pretending to
be you) may or may not have done?  Has this letter even truly been
written by Lady Kembe, or is the hand holding the pen that of some
rival scholar who wishes to encourage you to believe those letters, or
equally, dissuade you from doing so?  Did your letter ever even leave
Ensworth?  Perhaps the Darpani courier you entrusted it to was acting
for the Balance Petcharatiriv, who engineered this to teach you a
lesson regarding the unreliability of sources.

You cannot know, Your Highness, and neither can I.  Are the letters
authentic?  As much as this one is; they are authentically letters,
written by someone, for some purpose.  That is, in the end, all we can
say.

*Kembe, in and by her own hand, or not*
