**Vurt at the Moonrise Door**: Vurt and Ishad make their way to the Moonrise Gate, on the other side of which lie the Tombs. Their banter tells the reader what Vurt is doing, but not why, and shows both their affection for each other, and their old lion/young cub rivalry.

**Ishad's Onions**: Ishad tells the story of his arrival in Coriandel twenty years previously, and of his botched attempt to steal Prince Oro's prize racehorses with the aid of two Darpani tribesmen.

**Sweet in the Corral**: The prince's Gifted horse, Sweet, fills in the other side of Ishad's story. His dour account of what really happened paints a less flattering picture of Ishad, and also reveals that during his wandering years, Prince Oro was no more upright than Ishad and his partners.

**Cup Rainbow Reaching Falls In With a Madman**: One of the Darpani tribesmen picks up where Ishad left off. He describes their trial, during which Ishad maneuvers the recently-crowned prince into showing "mercy" by sending them to kill the bonescuttle instead of just having them flayed outright. Cup Rainbow Reaching and his cousin accept Prince Oro's decision stoically: as far as they're concerned, they're already dead.

**Eleñima Disapproves of Her Niece**: This chapter is set just a few weeks before the present day. In it, we learn that Eleñima (a middle-aged spinster who is trapped in her own self-righteousness) has struck some sort of bargain with a Bantangui immigrant named Shau Sheu, though its details are not revealed. What is revealed is that Eleñima has discovered that her niece, Sehdie, is being courted by a "mere rat catcher" named Vurt, the prize pupil of the rogue who once broke Eleñima's heart, and that she is bent on revenge...

**Vurt's Oath**: As he makes his way to the Tombs, where he believes the bonescuttle's lair to be, Vurt thinks back on the events that led to him being there. He had gone to Sehdie's house to ask for her father's permission to court her openly, only to be met with contempt. "What kind of life would you give her?" Sehdie's father demands. Stung, Vurt cuts his palm and swears by his life's blood to prove his worth by killing the bonescuttle that has recently started preying on Coriandel's poor. Blood oaths are magically binding in this world: once sworn, they must be fulfilled, or they drive the oath-taker to madness and suicide.

**Onnemeno and the Rats**: Onnemeno is Vurt's father. He is also more than a little bitter, as the fathers of rebellious teenagers often are. He has worked hard to give his son what little he could---how could Vurt throw it all away by swearing such a damn fool oath? As he goes about his rounds, trying to trap a pair of Gifted rats, we learn more about both Vurt and the world he has grown up in.

**Kerrem Brings Two Guardsmen a Drink**: Kerrem has been Vurt's closest friend since boyhood. As bookish as Vurt is active, Kerrem wants to be a writer, and to see the wonders he has read about since he was old enough to turn pages instead of chewing on them. In this chapter, we learn a little bit more about Vurt's character, watch as Kerrem helps Ishad and Vurt get past the prince's guards and into the Tombs, and discover that Kerrem has a secret.

**Has Eleñima's Moment Arrived?**: Back to Sehdie's prissy aunt, and a conversation she had several weeks ago with Shau Sheu. We learn of their bargain---Eleñima gets a chance to live her life over, Shau Sheu gets copies of the letters that Sehdie's father writes on behalf of the prince---and watch as Shau Sheu's hired magician summons the bonescuttle that Vurt will later swear to kill.

**Shau Sheu Frets**: This chapter picks up where the previous one left off, but from Shau Shau's point of view. In it, we discover that she is a spy, and that her promise to give Eleñima a second chance is a lie.

**Vurt's Gloves**: Vurt recounts an incident that occurred when he was thirteen. After being bullied and robbed, he decided that he didn't want to grow up to be a rat catcher like Onnemeno. He wanted to be someone that thieves would cross the street to avoid, just like Ishad.

**Cup Rainbow Reaching Remembers Lights Among Trees**: The Darpani tribesman takes us back to the first expedition into the Tombs. We follow him, his cousin, and Ishad as they make their way across a whispering bridge to a petrified forest hung with lights. There, they are attacked by a distorted creature that might once have been human, but which is now definitely mad. Even after being decapitated, it does not die; instead, it begins groping around on the floor to find its head. Chilled, the trio journey on.

**Sehdie in the Umram**: "Stories always have a lot to say about heroes," Sehdie tells us, "But what about their prizes? What about the princess that the handsome blacksmith's son rescues? What is life like for her?" She knows the answer: it's like being smothered under people's expectations. Young, beautiful, and from a good family, the only future in front of her is as a decoration on some well-to-do husband's arm. That is why she allows Vurt to start courting her after their chance meeting at the arena: it's because he isn't respectable, and isn't what she has been brought up to expect. It's all so romantic that she doesn't immediately realize that she doesn't actually love him...

**A Conversation in an Alley**: Comic dialog (some of it slightly drunken) between Vurt and Kerrem after Vurt's first "date" with Sehdie. Vurt is sure he's blown it; Kerrem alternates between reassuring him, and saying, "You said what!?"

**Oro Shares Some Pistachios**: In his youth, Prince Oro crisscrossed the world on behalf of a powerful old magician named Lady Kembe. Then duty called him back to Coriandel, and put him on its throne. One of his first acts was to send Ishad and his partners in crime into the Tombs. Twelve years later, he is so sick of paperwork and intrigue that he has taken to wandering the streets at night in disguise. On one of those incognito expeditions, he watches a young Vurt defend two other children from bullies. That incident, and his conversation with Vurt afterward, remind him that what he is doing is worth doing.

**Ishad Speaks to Old Friends**: The night after Vurt swears his oath, Ishad is visited by Vurt's mother, Meshash. This is our first hint that there is (or was) something between them, and that Vurt may in fact be Ishad's son. Face to face with his own mortality, and unable to bear the thought of losing Vurt, Ishad contacts Lady Kembe: like Coriandel's prince, he was once one of her agents. In exchange for Ishad returning to her service, Lady Kembe agrees to do what she can to help Vurt.

**Lady Kembe Has a Sleepless Night**: As promised, Lady Kembe turns her thoughts to Vurt. Putting a spell on his boots to guide him to the bonescuttle will be no great chore, but she is troubled: why another bonescuttle? She wanders through her house all night long, casting her thoughts far and wide, until she uncovers Shau Sheu's handiwork. She will not let that lie, not after fighting so hard a generation before to stop the Bantangui from conquering the Karaband, but neither can she intervene directly. By dawn, she has decided what to do. The chapter ends with her contacting Sweet, the prince's horse, who took the prince's place in her employ when Oro was crowned.

**Sehdie Holding Hands**: As the days go by, Sehdie realizes that she isn't in love with Vurt; she's in love with the idea of Vurt, but has no idea how to tell him that. To make matters worse, the only person she can turn to for advice is Vurt's best friend, Kerrem...

**Sweet's Return**: On Lady Kembe's orders, Sweet returns to Coriandel for the first time in years. He and Prince Oro have not spoken in years---each is too proud to make the first overture. Walking through streets full of bittersweet memories, he contacts Sehdie, and presents Lady Kembe's offer: Sehdie will help expose her aunt, Eleñima, and in exchange, Lady Kembe will get her out of Coriandel and give her a fresh start. Sehdie accepts, but only if Lady Kembe will take Kerrem as well. Amidst all their talking about Vurt, they have somehow fallen in love.

**Vurt's Boots**: This, the shortest chapter in the book, is told from the point of view of the spell Lady Kembe has cast on Vurt's boots. "We will not be awake for long," the boots think, but they are philosophical about the prospect.

**Cup Rainbow Reaching Remembers the Taste of Plums**: Back to Ishad and the two Darpani, twenty years ago. They find the bonescuttle's lair, but it attacks them before they are ready for it, killing Cup Rainbow Reaching's cousin. Ishad says they should wait for it to come back, but a contemptuous Cup Rainbow Reaching decides to pursue it on his own.

**Kerrem Accepts New Employment**: Sweet takes Lady Kembe's offer to Kerrem. Dazed by the discovery that Sehdie loves him, it takes Kerrem a moment to realize that he's agreeing to become a secret agent for one of the most powerful magicians in the world. Oh well---if nothing else, it'll give him plenty to write about. After helping Ishad and Vurt past the guards at the entrance to the Tombs, Kerrem makes his way to Sehdie's, where he helps her escape her aunt's vigilance. Hand in hand, they walk through Coriandel's streets once last time.

**Vurt in Darkness**: As he waits in the darkness after setting a trap for the bonescuttle, Vurt's thoughts wander to Sehdie. He finally admits to himself that he swore his oath because her affection was cooling, not because he really loved her. His vigil is interrupted by the appearance of a ghost, begging to be released. "I cannot," Vurt says---his oath takes precedence. The ghost fades away, leaving Vurt in darkness once again.

**Ishad on the Stairs**: Meanwhile, Ishad is making his way from where he dropped Vurt off to the exit from the Tombs. The creature that killed Cup Rainbow Reaching is still there; his son will need all the help he can get. On the way, Ishad is attacked by two giant talking centipedes. He manages to kill them; while he loses his sword in the process, he discovers a cache of human bones. They are Cup Rainbow Reaching's; until they are brought into the sunlight, his former partner's ghost will be trapped between life and death.

**Vurt Receives a Gift**: Cup Rainbow Reaching's ghost reappears just in time to save Vurt from the bonescuttle, which has crept up on him unnoticed. As the bonescuttle retreats into the darkness, the ghost steps into Vurt, flooding him with memories of what happened twenty years before. The memories begin to fade almost instantly, but they leave behind a picture of the bonescuttle's lair. Grimly determined, Vurt sets out to fulfil his oath.

**Cup Rainbow Reaching Earns His Name**: "The Darpani know that we each have our own death," he says. "It is born when we are born, nearby or far away. Our deaths spend our whole lives tracking us, trying to find us so they can be reunited with us. We say, 'Her death was born far away,' to mean, 'She lived a long life,' or, 'The child's death was born in the same tent,' to mean the baby never drew a breath." But to his surprise, the bonescuttle is not his death; instead, he kills it, though he is badly wounded in the process. Ishad carries him as far as the exit. There, they are attacked by something patient and tentacled, and that is when Cup Rainbow Reaching leaves this world.

**Ishad Waits**: Sitting in the darkness, waiting for Vurt, Ishad remembers Cup Rainbow Reaching's death. He can no longer deny that he has grown old; all he wants now is a chance to redeem all his mistakes by saving his son.

**Meshash an Hour Before Dawn**: On the other side of the city, Meshash lies awake in bed beside her husband, praying for her son's safety, and remembering those stolen moments, long ago, when she let herself dream of a more colorful life. She loves her husband, and doesn't regret her decision to stay with him, but sometimes... sometimes...

**Sehdie on a Cloud**: Meanwhile, Kerrem and Sehdie make their way across the city toward their rendezvous with Lady Kembe's agents. She is frightened; she is exhilirated; it is the end of everything she has known, and the beginning of everything she has ever hoped for.

**Vurt Learns Something About Courage**: Guided by the ghost's memories, Vurt finds and kills the bonescuttle. On his way out of the Tombs, he decides to tell Sehdie the truth about how he feels (or rather, how he doesn't). It wil be the hardest thing he has ever done...

**Eleñima Is Disappointed**: We discover that Eleñima may have had a hand in the death of Sehdie's mother---it is deliberately left ambiguous, but Eleñima may have pushed her sister to her death to prevent her turning Eleñima out. When she discovers that Sehdie has eloped, and that all her scheming has come to nought, it is the final straw that breaks her sanity's back. She rages about the house, smashing everything she can lay her hands on, until the servants call in some guardsmen to stop her. That's when Eleñima accidentally lets her arrangement with Shau Sheu out of the bag.

**Oro in the Morning**: It has been ten years since Oro's last ramble through the streets of Coriandel. He still misses his adventuring days, but has grown into his responsibilities as the city's ruler. In this chapter, we watch as news of Shau Sheu's spying is brought to him. Not for the first time, he wishes he wasn't too proud to ask Lady Kembe for help...

**Patience Disappointed**: It waits as it has waited for centuries---appetite, intelligence, teeth, and tentacles. It knows someone has gone into the Tombs; all it has to do is be patient, and its dinner will come to it. But this time, things do not go according to plan. This time, Ishad is there, forewarned and forearmed, ready to sacrifice himself to save his son's life. The creature reaches for Ishad---

**Cup Rainbow Reaching's Farewell Curse**: ---and we switch to Cup Rainbow Reaching's point of view. He remembers becoming a ghost, and the long, dark wait for salvation. When Shau Sheu summoned the bonescuttle, he bent its mind just a little, just enough, hoping against hope for rescue. Now that rescue has come; while Ishad loses a foot to the monster, he and Vurt both make it out of the Tombs alive, and take Cup's skull with them. Finally, he is free.

**A Conversation in a Palace**: The final scene is a conversation between Vurt and Prince Oro. They both realize that there's more to the night's events than either of them will ever understand, but so what? That's just the way life is.
