---
layout: page
permalink: /blue-tam/
---
# Blue Tam

Once again upon a time, there were two sisters named Red Tam and Green Tam. Red
Tam was the oldest, because the witch who had made them both had made her first,
and she was very strong. Once, when she saw some boys throwing snowballs at a
cow, she picked up a barn and set it down on the edge of the field so that the
cow would have something to hide behind.

Green Tam wasn't strong like Red Tam, but she knew how to speak to birds and
fish and animals. When she heard what Red Tam had done, she went and spoke with
the cow. "I didn't mind the snowballs," the cow said. "It was actually kind of
fun." So Green Tam got Red Tam to put the barn back where it belonged.

One windy day, while they were out flying their kites, they heard the ground
rumble beneath them. "What was that?" exclaimed Red Tam. "An earthquake?"

"Maybe it's a volcano!" Green Tam said. She clapped her hands
together. "Wouldn't it be wonderful if we had our very own volcano?"

The ground rumbled again, louder and louder. Suddenly it stopped.  Nothing
happened for a moment, and then something went *thump! thump!  thump!* inside
the big old stump the sisters used as a picnic table. The top of the stump swung
open like a lid on hinges. A girl with frazzled brown hair popped her head up
and called, "Come on! Come on! We have to hurry!"

"Hurry?" Red Tam asked, putting her hand on her head to stop the wind from
blowing her hat away. "Hurry where? And what are you doing in our stump?"

"Just hurry!" the girl said. "There won't be another train here for *ages*!"

"Train?" Green Tam asked, feeling confused. "There aren't any trains here."

"The Secret Subway train!" the girl said. She climbed out of the stump, ran over
to the sisters, grabbed their arms, and started tugging them toward the
stump. "Oh, come on! There's no time for explanations now! Mother's in trouble!
We have to rescue her!"

Green Tam looked at Red Tam. Red Tam looked at Green Tam. "Rescue?"  they said
at the same time.

"Why, there's nothing in the world we like more than a good rescue!"  exclaimed
Green Tam. "Of course we'll help you rescue your mother!"

"Not *my* mother, silly!" the girl said, still tugging on their arms.  "*Our*
mother!"

Green Tam blinked. Red Tam's jaw dropped. "*Our* mother?"

The girl with the frazzled hair stopped pulling on their arms and glared at
them. "Yes, *our* mother!" she said. She pulled a blue hat out of her coat
pocket and stuck it on her head. "I'm your sister Blue Tam!  And our mother has
been kidnapped by Nackles, the Vanilla Villain! And if we don't rescue her,
something terrible will happen!"

Her sisters shuddered. They both knew who Nackles was. Every year, while Santa
Claus traveled around the world giving presents to all the good little children,
Nackles made the same journey in an old wagon with squeaky wheels drawn by eight
smelly goats. If you had been bad, he would steal your favorite book or toy. If
you'd been really bad, he would steal you instead, and put you to work in his
underground workshop at the South Pole, breaking toys and scribbling on books
all day long.

"Now, please!" Blue Tam pleaded. "We have to hurry, or---"

But before she could say another word, an especially big gust of wind went
*whoosh!* across the yard. With a creak and a groan, the top of the stump swayed
and fell forward. *Clonk!*

"Oh no!" Blue Tam shrieked. She ran over to the stump and tugged at its
top. "It's closed! It's closed! And there isn't another entrance for miles and
miles!"

"Oh, don't worry," Red Tam said confidently. "If you'll move out of the way for
a second, I'll open it up again." Before Blue Tam could say another word, Red
Tam wrapped her arms around the stump and heaved.  Up it came, roots and all!

"Hmm," Green Tam said a moment later, looking down. "I don't see any tracks or
trains. I just see a hole in the ground."

"That's because there aren't any," Blue Tam said in despair. "The Secret Subway
is magic. Once an entrance closes, it can be years or forever before it opens
again." She crossed her eyes and held her breath. Her face went red, and then
redder, and then very, very red.  Just when it looked like her head was going to
explode, she let her breath out with a whoosh.

"My tickets are only good for today," she said tiredly. "And the only other stop
today is at sundown in the middle of the Very Dangerous Swamp. It would take us
days and days to get there!" She sat down on the grass and pulled her hat off.

"Oh, please don't cry," Red Tam begged her. (Watching other people cry always
made Red Tam feel icky.)

"I'm not going to cry!" Blue Tam said angrily. "I'm just going to pout a bit."

"Well, would you like to come and pout indoors?" Green Tam asked politely. "We
could make some porridge, and you can have some crunchy beetles on it if you
want."

"Beetles?" said Blue Tam. "Ewwww!" But she got up anyway, and followed Green Tam
into the house.

A few minutes later Blue Tam swallowed and said, "I think I'll have brown sugar
on my next bowl instead, thank you." Green Tam shrugged.  She was a bit
disappointed that Blue Tam hadn't liked the beetles, but pleased as well,
because it would mean more for her.

"So, what has happened to our mother?" Green Tam asked.

"And what's the Secret Subway," Red Tam added, "And why---"

"Slow down!" spluttered Blue Tam. She gulped one last spoonful of porridge, then
set the bowl aside.

Her sisters listened intently as she explained that their mother had been
kidnapped by Nackles because he wanted to make everything in the world the same
flavor. He wasn't powerful enough to do it by himself, but if he could steal
their mother's magic, nothing on Earth would be able to stop him.

"Just think," Blue Tam said. "Vanilla apples. Vanilla cheese. Even chicken gumbo
would taste like vanilla!"

"Even porridge?" Red Tam asked.

"Even porridge," Blue Tam said.

"Even beetles?" Green Tam gasped.

"I suppose," Blue Tam said with a shrug. "I never really thought about it."

Green Tam thumped the table. "Well, we can't let that happen! We have to stop
him!"

Blue Tam sighed. "I know," she said. "But it won't be easy. I went to the
library and looked under 'N' in the Encyclopedia Badthingia. It said that the
only thing in the world he's afraid of is a magic all-flavors ice cream cone. So
I looked it up under 'M', and guess what? There's only one in the whole world,
and he has it!"

"Are you sure?" Green Tam asked. "Maybe the book made a mistake."

Blue Tam shook her head. "The book is right. We *have* to get to the South Pole,
and that means we have to get to the middle of the Very Dangerous Swamp by
sundown. But how?"

"What if we could fly?" Green Tam asked. "Could you show us where to go?"

"I think so," said Blue Tam. "But I didn't know you could fly."

"We can't," Red Tam said smugly. She had realized what her sister was
thinking. "But we have a friend who can."

Red Tam jumped up and went over to the big cedar chest beneath the window and
pulled out a folded piece of brown suede. She sat back down again, then unfolded
it carefully on the kitchen table. Wrapped inside it was a scale the size and
shape of a guitar pick that glistened blue, green, and gold.

"He gave us this," Red Tam explained. "If we hold it over a candle and say his
name backward three times, he'll hear us."

"Is he a magician?" Blue Tam asked.

Red Tam shook her head. "No. He's much better than a magician."

Green Tam lit a candle and set it in the middle of the table. Red Tam held the
scale over the flame. "Dehcterw! Dehcterw! Dehcterw!" she chanted. The candle
flame turned gold, then green, then blue. Then it puffed out, leaving nothing
but a thin wisp of smoke.

"Now what?" asked Blue Tam.

"Now we pack," Red Tam told her.

"And eat," added Green Tam. "No telling when we'll get porridge like this
again!"

## The Very Dangerous Swamp

As they packed, ate, and washed the dishes, Blue Tam told them that their mother
had always intended to have a third daughter. What with inventing new spells,
and sewing new tails for kittens who'd lost theirs, however, it had taken her a
while to get around to it. Instead of making Blue Tam extra strong, like Red
Tam, or able to speak to animals, like Green Tam, she'd given her the gift of
knowing where things were.

"Does that mean you can find my pearl-handled knitting needles?" Red Tam asked.

"Of course," said Blue Tam. She crossed her eyes for a second.  "They're under
the second seat from the left in the next-to-back row of the theatre. Under a
popcorn bag."

"Wow," said Red Tam. "I hope it's still there when we get back."

"If it isn't, I'll just find it for you again," Blue Tam promised.  "But you
still haven't told me how we're going to get through the Very Dangerous Swamp to
the Secret Subway stop in time to save the world."

Just then there was a *whoosh!* overhead. Something went *crack!* like an
enormous wet towel being snapped. "Wretched!" Green Tam and Red Tam cried. They
and rushed out the door with Blue Tam behind them.

There, in the middle of the back yard, was a very large dragon. His scales were
the color of sapphires, emeralds, rubies, and opals. He sniffed at the hole
where the stump had been, then raised his head and smiled at the sisters.

"I heard you call," he said. "I hope there isn't any trouble."  Little puffs of
smoke escaped from his nostrils as he spoke.

"Oh, there's trouble all right," Red Tam told him grimly. "Nackles has kidnapped
our mother. If we don't rescue her, he'll make everything in the world taste
like vanilla!"

"Even old tires?" gasped Wretched. He liked to eat old tires more than anything
else in the world, except for pirates.

"Even old tires," Green Tam confirmed. "Our sister told us."

Wretched stretched his neck out to sniff Blue Tam. "Hello," he said
politely. "I'm Wretched the Dragon. I'm not really wretched any more, but I'm
still a dragon."

"Hello," Blue Tam replied. "I'm Blue Tam. I'm pleased to meet you, I think."

Green Tam reached up and scratched Wretched behind one ear. "We need you to take
us to the Very Dangerous Swamp right away," she said. "Can you do it?"

"The Very Dangerous Swamp?" asked Wretched. "Won't that be very dangerous?"

"Probably," Red Tam agreed. "But Blue Tam says it's the only way to get to the
South Pole in time to save our mother."

Wretched opened his mouth to ask what the swamp had to do with the South Pole,
but then he remembered who he was talking to. "All right," he said
instead. "I'll do it."

As quick as swallows, the three girls got their packs and some warm sweaters
from the house. "Climb up on my back," the dragon told them.  "And hold on
tight!"

Blue Tam sat in front, so that she could give directions. Green Tam sat in the
middle, and Red Tam sat in the back, so that she could catch anyone who slipped
off.

With a roar, the dragon leapt into the air. Three quick flaps of his leathery
wings carried them up above the chimneys, up above the treetops, and up above
the clouds.

They were soon glad that they'd worn warm sweaters, as it was very cold so high
up. The ground below them looked like a brown and green quilt, marked here and
there by a round blue lake. They waved at the people they saw, but they either
didn't look up, or ran for cover when they saw the dragon overhead. Green Tam
wondered how that made Wretched feel, and resolved not to wait until there was
an emergency before calling him again.

As they flew on, roads and houses became scarcer and scarcer.  Eventually, there
was nothing below them but a dark green forest. Soon, even the trees thinned out
as the ground became wetter and swampier.

"It's very dreary," Red Tam said. "But why do they call it 'Very Dangerous'?"

"I don't know," Blue Tam confessed.

"I don't know either," Wretched puffed over his shoulder. "But I'm going to have
to land for a while to rest, so perhaps we'll find out."

The dragon spiraled down toward a little sandbar. When they were only a few feet
above it Green Tam suddenly shouted, "Pull up! Pull up!  There's something in
the water!"

Wretched flapped his wings to level off. "What did you see?" he asked.

"There!" Green Tam pointed. Floating toward the sandbar were dozens of...logs?
No, they weren't logs! They were crocodiles! When they saw that the dragon
wasn't going to land, they snarled, opening their jaws veeerrrrry wide to show
off hundreds and hundreds of sharp, snaggly teeth.

"Huh!" snorted Wretched. "*I'm* not afraid of a few crocodiles! Why, they can't
even fly!"

"No, but they can bite," Green Tam shuddered. "Look how many of them there are!"

"Can you ask them to leave us alone?" Red Tam suggested.

"I can try," Green Tam replied doubtfully.

Wretched swooped down once more. "Hello!" Green Tam hissed in Crocodile. "Would
it be all right if we rested here for a while?"

"Yessss... yessss... of coursssssss..." the crocodiles hissed back.  "You can
resssst here as long as you wishhhh...." Then they snickered and snapped their
jaws in the murky water.

Green Tam imagined she could hear their stomachs growling. "I don't trust them,"
she said.

"Neither do I," Wretched admitted. "But I don't know how much further I can
carry you."

And so they flew on, deeper and deeper into the Very Dangerous Swamp.  Every
time they saw a place to land Wretched would circle over it, but every time, it
was instantly surrounded by dozens of crocodiles. Just when Wretched was so
exhausted that they would have to take their chances, Blue Tam shouted, "Up
ahead! That's it!"

There in front of them were the ruins of an old castle. The swamp had flooded
the bottom floors, but its walls and towers still stood proudly above the muck.

Wretched was so tired that he was trembling by the time they touched down on the
tallest tower. The three sisters slid off his back onto the stones. Their legs
and arms ached from holding on so long.

"Poor Wretched." Green Tam hugged him. "You were wonderful."

"Yes, and when we get back, we'll cook you a huge pile of old tires," said Red
Tam, scratching the dragon behind the ears.

Blue Tam crossed her eyes and thought until she went red. "The most delicious
old tires in the world are just a couple of hours away from Red Tam and Green
Tam's cottage," she finally said, a bit shyly.  "When we get back, I could show
you where."

"Thank you," puffed Wretched. He was so tired that there was only a tiny flicker
of flame around his nostrils. "But right now I had better get some rest." The
three girls thanked him once again, then shouldered their packs and set off.

Blue Tam led them into the tower and down stone steps that had been worn smooth
by countless rainstorms. Moss and fungus grew on the damp walls.  The further
they went, the darker and smellier it got, !wuntil the air tasted as bad as the
swamp smelled.

When they finally reached the bottom of the stairs, they could hear the swamp
gurgling and splurshing through the walls on either side of them.  "I wonder if
there are crocodiles here?" Red Tam whispered. She knew she was stronger than
any old crocodile, but if there were ten of them, or a hundred, it would be a
different (and much shorter!) story.

Blue Tam crossed her eyes and said, "The nearest crocodile is...right behind
us!" She shrieked and grabbed her sisters' arms. "Run!"

The girls raced down a long corridor and up the stairs at the other end.  Behind
them the crocodiles hissed in anger when they realized they'd been found out.

The girls came around a corner, one two three, and skidded to a halt.  There in
front of them was a blank stone wall. There were no doors and no windows. It was
a dead end!

"I thought you said the subway was here!" Red Tam said to Blue Tam.

"It is, it is," Blue Tam told her. She tore off her pack and rooted around
inside it. "Hard-boiled squid eggs... left-handed hammer... A ha!" She pulled
out three brightly-colored pieces of plastic and handed one to each of her
sisters. "All-day passes," she explained. "Now follow me!" She raisied her own
ticket in her hand, then closed her eyes and stepped backward. Instead of
bumping into the wall, she went right through it and vanished.

Red Tam and Green Tam gasped. "Wow," they said together. Without wasting another
second they spun around and raised their tickets. As they closed their eyes they
saw a very large, very toothsome snout coming around the corner. With a gulp,
they stepped backward.

## The Secret Subway

They found themsleves standing on a platform at the side of an enormous
tunnel. The marble floor had once been brightly polished, but was now almost
hidden under moss and mold. The walls had been covered little brass tiles, but
so many of them had fallen off that it looked like a crazy checkerboard. Vines
and streamers of moss hung down from the ceiling.

"Do all the stations look like this?" Red Tam asked, gaping.

"Oh no," Blue Tam assured her. "The main stations are much cleaner, and have all
kinds of people in them. This station probably hasn't been used since everyone
left the castle."

"Or was eaten by crocodiles," Green Tam muttered. Raising her voice, she asked,
"Do you know how long it is until the next train?"

"They run every hour at quarter past," Blue Tam told her. "Except on holidays,
when they run on the half hour until ten o'clock. Then they run at quarter to,
unless it's a day with an 'R' in its name."

"So how will we know which one to get on?" Red Tam asked.

"Oh, the first train that comes is always the right one," Blue Tam said. "You
only have to wait for trains in a regular subway." With that, she took her
thermos out of her pack offered some lemonade to her sisters.

Sure enough, they didn't have to wait very long. The first sign that a train was
coming was a slight rumbling, which quickly became so loud that they couldn't
talk. A hot, dry wind blew out of the tunnel, and then *whoosh!* The train
roared into the station, its brakes squealing as it slowed to a stop.

No two cars in the train were exactly alike. One seemed to be a giant
aquarium. Inside it, the girls could see a big gray whale, with enormous
flippers like wings. Another car seemed to have started out as a Viking
ship. Its sail had been taken down, and a glass roof put over its top so that
passengers wouldn't be blown away as the train roared around.

The car directly in front of them looked like a stagecoach. It had four big,
spoked wheels on each side, and curlicue carvings front and back.  "Come on!"
Blue Tam said as its door swung open. She threw her pack on her shoulder and
took the steps two at a time, with Red Tam and Green Tam on her heels. A whistle
blew, the door closed, and the train set off again.

The subway car was just as fancy on the inside. Two wide seats covered in red
velvet faced each other. Blue Tam sat down with her pack in her lap. Green Tam
and Red Tam sat beside her and watched the tunnel walls go racing past outside.

"We must be going very fast," Green Tam said. "I---wait! What was that?"

"Probably just an old pyramid that's been buried by sand dunes for a thousand
years," Blue Tam said. "We're probably under the desert by now."

"The desert?" Red Tam exclaimed. "But that's miles away from the swamp! How soon
will we get to the South Pole?"

"I don't know," Blue Tam said with a sigh, suddenly looking very tired. "I can
only tell where things are, not when. I just hope our mother is all right."

"How did you find out she'd been kidnapped?" Green Tam asked.

"I don't know," Blue Tam admitted.

"What do you mean, you don't know?" Green Tam asked.

"I mean I don't know!" Blue Tam said, rubbing her eyes. "I don't even really
remember when I last saw her, or what the last thing we did together was. I just
woke up one morning and knew that she'd been kidnapped."

Green Tam and Red Tam were silent for a moment. "We haven't seen her for a long
time either," Green Tam finally admitted.

"She didn't even send us cards for our birthdays last year," Red Tam added. "We
made some for her, though. We keep them in the kitchen for when we see her."

Everyone was quiet for a moment, and then Blue Tam shivered. "They say the
Vanilla Villain is as wicked as a troll, and as crafty as Sneezy Simms the
pirate captain. I hope Mother is all right."

"Well, we know a troll, and he's not really very wicked," Red Tam reassured her.

"Yes, and we've met Sneezy Simms," added Green Tam. "We helped Wretched and the
Prince of Cats capture him and his crew."

Blue Tam's eyes got big and round. "Really?" she gasped. "Oh, that must have
been *such* an adventure!"

So as the subway train rattled on toward the South Pole, with stops at Timbuktu,
the bottom of the Atlantic, and a little bookstore in Patagonia, Red Tam and
Green Tam told Blue Tam about the adventures they'd had. As they talked, they
ate their sandwiches, and drank the last of their lemonade.

Red Tam didn't remember closing her eyes, but she must have, because a little
while later she woke up. Green Tam was tugging on her earlobe saying, "Sleeeepy
head... sleeeepy head..." Red Tam blinked, yawned, and stretched.

"Where are we?" she asked.

"We're almost there," Blue Tam told her. She gave her hair a few more strokes
with a brush, then put her hat back on and pulled it down over her ears. "Make
sure you have your mitts on. It's going to be very cold."

The loudspeaker crackled overhead. "South Pole next stop, next stop South Pole,"
a deep voice said. The subway train began to slow down.

"Remember," Blue Tam told them. "Everyone must think that we've been kidnapped
by Nackles because we're bad. Whatever happens, don't be nice to *anyone*." Red
Tam and Green Tam promised. As the subway train came to a stop, Red Tam even
practiced sticking out her tongue at her reflection in the window.

The platform they stepped onto was very different from the one beneath the
swamp. The walls were white, and the floor was even whiter. Just as Green Tam
realized they were made of ice, Blue Tam whispered, "Over there---guards!" Sure
enough, two enormous penguins stood beside the door that led away from the
platform.

"Do you want me to pick them up and hold them in the air while you got the magic
all-flavors ice cream cone?" Red Tam whispered.

"Shh!" Blue Tam whispered back. "Don't even mention the you-know-what unless you
have to! Penguins have very good ears, and evil magicians have even better
ones!"

"I know what to do," Green Tam said. "Follow me!" Before Red Tam or Blue Tam
could stop her, she marched straight toward the two guards.

When she was only a few steps away from the door the penguin closest to her
swivelled its head to glare at her with its beady black eyes. "Name and
business!" it squawked.

"*My* name is none of *your* business," Green Tam replied firmly in
Penguin. "These two tried to escape, and I am bringing them back. Let me pass!"

"Prisoners?" the penguin squawked. "No-one said anything to us about prisoners!"

Green Tam scowled. "Or maybe you just weren't listening." She wagged a finger at
the penguin. "There'll be no more fish heads for you!  You'll eat nothing but
snowballs until Hallowe'en!"

At that, the second penguin squawked, "I think *I* remember someone saying
something about prisoners."

"That's better," Green Tam said firmly. "Now, let me through!" And with that she
uncrossed her arms and marched forward.

The penguins scrambled out of her way, but glared at Blue Tam and Red Tam as
they followed meekly behind their sister. "Hrrk!" they squawked. "*You'll* never
see sunshine again!" Blue Tam shivered when they spoke, but Red Tam just stuck
out her tongue.

The door opened onto a long, cold corridor, with ice on its floor and cracked
green tiles on its walls. The further they walked, the colder it became, until
every breath was an icy cloud.

Finally they reached a big green door with a grimy brass handle. Blue Tam
crossed her eyes and thought. "It's in *his* office," she shivered. "Upstairs."

"Well, then," Red Tam said. "Let's go!" She pushed the door open.

## In Nackles' Cave

The noise in the enormous room on the other side was deafening. At one end were
hundreds of boxes, each crammed full of books, boots, dolls, hats, trombones,
slingshots, and everything else a child could want.  Hundreds of boys and girls
were pulling things out of the boxes and putting them on conveyor belts that ran
the length of the room. Even more children stood beside the conveyor belts with
hammers, axes, chainsaws, and buckets of greasy muck. They smashed, tore,
hacked, and splashed the things in front of them until nothing was left but
scraps, shreds, and stains. A third group of children swept up the remains that
spilled off at the end.

The three sisters watched the destruction in horror. "This is terrible!" Red Tam
gasped. "All those toys! All those books!"

"And all those poor children!" Blue Tam added. "I don't care how bad they were,
they don't deserve this! We have to save them!"

"But how?" Red Tam asked. "We have to get the you-know-what and rescue
you-know-who before we're caught!"

Blue Tam thought for a second. "*He* rides around in an old wagon that's pulled
by eight smelly goats, right?"

"That's what people say," Green Tam replied.

"Well, if it's big enough to get them all here, it has to be big enough to get
them home." Blue Tam crossed her eyes again, then wrinkled her nose. "Hmph," she
snorted. "The smelliest things in Antarctica are in their stalls at the bottom
of the stairs next to that grinding machine." She pointed toward a squat black
machine on the other side of the room.

She looked back at her sisters with a gleam in her eye. "Now here's my plan..."

A few moments later, a skinny, scowling, curly-haired boy named Fred felt an
elbow dig into his ribs, and heard someone say, "Come on, move over, make room!"
Red Tam stepped up to the conveyor belt beside him with Blue Tam's left-handed
hammer in her hand and put a dent in a toy trumpet.

Fred rubbed his ribs for a moment, then swung his own hammer and added an even
bigger dent. "If you weren't just a girl, I'd shove you right back!" he growled.

Red Tam gave the next toy (a wind-up clock) a whack. "Oh yeah?" she said. "Well,
if you weren't just a boy, I'd have shoved you even harder!"

"Oh yeah?" Fred replied. "Well, if you did that, my dad would--- my dad
would---" All of a sudden his face screwed up, as if he was going to
cry. Instead, he swung his hammer so hard that it smashed the clock to pieces.

"Your dad would what?" Red Tam asked.

"Nothing," said Fred bitterly. "He wouldn't do anything."

"No talking!" squawked a voice. Red Tam jumped and turned around. The penguin
standing behind her glared down its beak at her. "No talking, or no dinner!"

Red Tam and Fred went back to bashing toys. The penguin watched them a moment
longer, then wandered away to be mean to someone else.

"How long have you been here?" Red Tam whispered.

"I dunno," Fred said. "It feels like forever."

Red Tam glanced around, then leaned closer to him. "Do you want to escape?" she
asked.

Fred looked at her, startled. For a moment Red Tam saw hope in his face, but
then his scowl returned, and he shook his head. "Why bother?" he asked.

Red Tam's jaw dropped. "Why bother?" she whispered, amazed. "What do you mean,
why bother? What about your family?"

"What about them?" Fred sneered. "If they wanted me back, they would have come
to get me long ago."

"Well, maybe they don't know where you are," Red Tam suggested, feeling
confused.

Fred nodded. "You're right. They probably didn't even bother to read my
note. That's how much *they* care." *Crunch!* went a doll-sized teapot.

"Nackles let you write a note when he kidnapped you?" Red Tam asked, feeling
completely confused.

Fred stared at Red Tam, his eyes narrowing. "Nackles didn't kidnap me," he
said. "Nackles never kidnapped anyone. We all *chose* to come here. Didn't you?"

"You *chose* to come here?" Red Tam gasped. "Why?"

Fred scowled. "Because I wanted to find out if my mom and dad really loved me,"
he said. "But now I know they don't, because they never came to get me."

"Well, maybe they don't know how to get here! Maybe they---"

"Maybe they *just*... *don't*... *care*!" Fred shouted. He glanced around to see
if anyone had heard, then gave Red Tam a withering look.  "Why don't you go work
somewhere else before you get me into trouble?" he asked. Then he turned away
and started bashing toys again.

## The Magic All-Flavors Ice Cream Cone

While Red Tam talked to Fred, Green Tam and Blue Tam picked up some broken toys
from the floor and walked toward the grinding machine.  No-one paid them any
attention. When they reached the machine, they ducked behind it onto the stairs
that led down to the goats' stalls.

Blue Tam had been right: they *were* the smelliest things in the whole of
Antarctica. However, they weren't the smartest. It took Green Tam only a few
moments to convince the goats that the two girls were working for Nackles,
particularly after Blue Tam gave them some orange peels and wax paper to chew.

"His office is up above the workshop," Blue Tam whispered once they were back at
the top of the stairs. "So that he can watch everything being smashed." She
paused for a moment and crossed her eyes to think.  "But he's not there right
now."

"All right," Green Tam whispered back. "Let's go!"

They picked up their broken toys again and marched across the workshop
floor. Just as they reached the stairs that led up to Nackles' office a penguin
stepped in their way and squawked, "Where do you think you're going?"

Green Tam held up the toys in her arms. "Look at these!" she squawked back in
Penguin. "This doll still has both its arms! And there are pictures in this book
that haven't been scribbled on at all! These children aren't working nearly hard
enough! We're going to report them!"

"Oh no you're not," the penguin squawked. "No-one is allowed upstairs."

"Hmmm," Green Tam said, narrowing her eyes. "Are you trying to keep this shoddy
work a secret? Did you already know about it? Are *you* the one who's
responsible?"

"No, no, not at all!" the penguin protested. "I've got nothing to hide." It
shuffled its webbed feet for a moment, then stepped out of their way.

When they reached the top of the stairs they set the broken toys down.  "You get
the you-know-what," Blue Tam said.

"What are you going to do?" Green Tam asked.

"Find our mother!" Blue Tam said. She crossed her eyes. "She's close. She's very
close, but I can't tell exactly where she is." She opened her eyes. "Be as quick
as you can. *He's* very close too."

Green Tam opened the door to the office as quietly as she could. The whole of
the far wall was one big window, through which Green Tam could see the children
working below. The only furniture was a battered old desk and chair. A black
book lay on the desk next to a plateful of sandwich crusts. Next to it, in a
small glass case, was the magic ice cream cone.

Green Tam picked up the case and watched the magic ice cream cone ripple from
one colorful flavor to another. Strawberry walnut, toffee oat ripple, pineapple
guava, and even vanilla, but vanilla with strange sparkly bits in it---each came
and went in turn. She was so fascinated that she didn't hear the door open and
close quietly behind her.

"It's beautiful, isn't it?" a mild voice asked.

Green Tam whirled around. The gray-haired man standing there wasn't tall or
short, or fat, or skinny, and he had a friendly look on his face. As she gaped
at him he rubbed his glasses on his sleeve and put them back on.

"I look at it a lot," he said, stepping toward Green Tam. She stumbled backward,
clutching the case close to her. He stopped, looking disappointed, then sat down
on the corner of the desk.

"Who are you?" Green Tam asked.

"They call me Nackles," the man said. "What's your name?"

"Nackles?" Green Tam gasped.

"Yes, Nackles," he said, smiling. "Why, you've been listening to the stories
they all tell, haven't you? About how I steal toys, and even children? Well,
they're all rubbish."

"But---but I've seen them!" Green Tam spluttered. "Down there! All those
children!"

"Those children are here because they chose to be," Nackles said calmly.

Green Tam felt as if the world was spinning around her (which it was, since she
was standing right at the South Pole). "But---"

"You thought I kidnapped them, didn't you?" Nackles shook his head.  "I've never
kidnapped anyone. All I do is pay them a visit. And ask them if they think their
mothers and fathers love them. They all start by saying 'yes', but the more I
ask, the less sure they are. So then I tell them that one way to find out would
be to pretend to lose a toy, or a book, and see if their parents replace it. Of
course, it would be wrong for them to lie about something like that, so I let
them give me the toy to take away."

Nackles' smile was fixed on his face, and his eyes almost gleamed.  "But do you
know what happens? Just as I'm about to leave, sometimes, a child will ask me if
a missing toy or book will be enough of a test.  And do you know what I tell
them? I tell them that the only way to know, to really know for sure, is to
pretend to be kidnapped, and see whether their parents come to get them."

He paused for a moment, then shrugged. "Their parents never come, of course. Not
ever."

"Not even one?" Green Tam gasped.

"Not even one," Nackles said. "Do you think your mother would come for you?"

"Of course!" Green Tam said stoutly.

"Really?" Nackles asked, looking down at the notebook on his desk.  "When's the
last time you saw her?"

"Well, it's been a while," Green Tam admitted.

"Really?" Nackles asked, flipping through the notebook with a frown on his
face. "Don't you think that if she really loved you she'd tuck you into bed
every night?"

Green Tam hesitated. "Well, she's probably very busy..."

Nackles glanced up at her. "Too busy even to say goodnight?" he asked, with a
sad expression on his face. "Does she at least come on picnics with you once in
a while?"

"Well, no," Green Tam said reluctantly. "Not for a while. She's been away..."

At that, Nackles looked even sadder. "It doesn't sound to me like you're really
sure she'd come for you at all," he said. "And you know there's only one way to
find out. Why don't you put that thing back down on my desk and---"

Just then the door flew open with a bang. "Look out!" Blue Tam shouted. "He's
casting a spell on you! Don't look at his eyes!"

Nackles whirled around. "You!" he snarled. "How did *you* get in here? How did
you get *out* of here?"

"You leave her alone!" Blue Tam shouted.

Nackles whirled around to face Green Tam again. "Give me that magic ice cream
cone!" he ordered. The smile was gone from his face. "Right now!"

For an instant, just for an instant, Green Tam hesitated. Then she thought about
the time her mother had helped her catch crabs on the beach, and the time she'd
let her stay up past midnight to watch a comet go by, and then she set her jaw
and said, "I won't. Not now, not ever."

"Give it to me, or I'll turn you into a tin can and feed you to my goats!"
Nackles thundered. He raised his arms and crossed his eyes.  "Ibbledy fabbledy
foo!" he shouted.

"Quick, the ice cream cone!" Blue Tam shrieked. Before Nackles could finish
casting his evil spell, Green Tam opened the glass case and pulled the ice cream
cone out. Her mouth was instantly filled with a hundred thousand flavors, and
she suddenly smelled more delicious aromas than there are words in the
dictionary.

"Aarrgh!" Nackles howled. He tripped backward over the stool, holding his nose
shut with one hand and covering his mouth with the other.

Blue Tam ran over to her sister. "Are you all right?" she asked anxiously.

"I think so," Green Tam said.

"Well then come on!" Blue Tam said. "We have to rescue the children!" She shooed
Green Tam out the door ahead of her, then hesitated and glanced down at the
notebook on Nackles' desk. Her eyes went wide. As the evil wizard tried to
struggle back to his feet without uncovering his mouth or nose, she popped the
notebook into her pack and ran down the stairs after her sister.

Red Tam was waiting for them at the bottom of the stairs, glaring at the penguin
guard (who was trying very hard to ignore her). Green Tam and Blue Tam skidded
to a stop.

"But---why aren't the children children ready!" Blue Tam panted.  "You were
supposed to get them ready!"

"They don't want to come," Red Tam said flatly.

Blue Tam stared at her. "What do you mean? Of course they want to come!"

Red Tam shook her head. "I've asked a dozen of them. They all say the same
thing. They don't think their parents want them back, so they say they might as
well stay here."

"Parents?" the penguin suddenly squawked. "Why, you don't really work here at
all, do you? You're really spies!" He tipped his head back and honked three
times. The other guards instantly started waddling toward them.

"But they *have* to want to leave!" Blue Tam wailed. "We can't leave them here!"

"We're going to have to!" Red Tam said, grabbing Blue Tam's arm.  "Now, where's
mother?"

"I couldn't find her!" Blue Tam wailed again. Tears were running down her
cheeks. "I looked and looked, and I could feel that she was close, but I
couldn't find her! He must have cast a spell on her. I won't leave without her!"

"Oh yes you will," Green Tam said grimly, taking her other arm.  Half-dragging
Blue Tam between them, Red Tam and Green Tam ran to the stairs that led down to
the stables, then clattered down the stairs to where the goats were patiently
waiting.

## Rescue

A moment later the old wagon was flying over the white ice and cold blue
ocean. Blue Tam sat between her sisters with the magic all-flavors ice cream
cone in her hand. "It's not fair," she sniffled. "How could they not want to be
rescued?"

Green Tam put her arm around her sister. "Not everyone is as lucky as us," she
said gently, thinking about how she'd felt when Nackles was talking to
her. "They must really not know how much their parents love them."

Blue Tam sniffled once again, then wiped her cheeks with her sleeves and
straightened up. "Well," she said decisively. "Then we'll just have to show
them!" She reached deep down into her coat pocket and pulled out the black book
she had taken from Nackles' desk.

"What's that?" Red Tam asked.

"It's Nackles' address book," Blue Tam said. "We're going to go and get every
single one of those children's parents, and bring them here. *Then* we'll see
who doesn't want to be rescued!"

"Bring them *here*?" Red Tam and Green Tam gasped in unison.

"Bring them here," Blue Tam confirmed. "Now, who knows how to steer a bunch of
goats? We need to get to 17 Falcon Gardens, Scotland, second chimney from the
left, the dog barks."

"That's a funny-sounding address," Green Tam said doubtfully.

"Well, funny or not, it's where we're going," Blue Tam told her.

The three sisters snuggled together to stay warm as they flew through the
night. They landed in from of 17 Falcon Gardens with barely a thump.

"It's very dark," Red Tam whispered. "Maybe we should wait until the sun comes
up."

"We can't," Blue Tam whispered back. "It would break the spell on the wagon. We
have to do the whole trip in one night." She got out of the wagon and walked up
to the front door.

"Aren't we supposed to go down the chimney?" Green Tam hissed.

"And get soot and grime all over our clothes?" Blue Tam asked. "The grown-ups
would *never* believe us then." And with that, she knocked on the door.

After a moment a light came on inside the house. "Who's there?" a gruff voice
asked.

"The Tam sisters," Blue Tam said. "We're friends of---" She glanced down at
Nackles' address book. "---your son Fred."

The door flew open. Except for his beard and his glasses, the worried man
standing there looked just like his son. The worried woman standing beside him
had the same curly hair as Fred. "Do you know where he is?"  the man
demanded. "We've been so worried."

"Didn't you read his note?" Red Tam asked, with a sinking feeling in her
stomach.

"His note?" Fred's mother said. "We didn't find any note. Oh please, what's
happened to him."

Red Tam's head whirled. No note? But Fred had said---

"It's Nackles!" Green Tam gasped. "He gets the children to write notes, but he
doesn't actually leave them, so their parents never know where they are! Oh,
he's *horrible*!"

Blue Tam clenched her hands into fists. "Nackles is holding your son prisoner at
the South Pole," she said to Fred's parent. "You have to come rescue him."

Fred's father scowled. "Nackles? Why, he's just a story. There's no such
person."

"I suppose you don't believe in magic wagons or flying goats either," Blue Tam
asked innocently.

"Of course not," the man growled. "There's no such---" Then he stopped, and his
eyes went wide, as Blue Tam stepped out of his way to show him Nackles' wagon
sitting in the middle of the road, and eight goats nibbling on his hedge.

"I believe," Fred's mother said suddenly. "Oh, I believe! Please, take me
wherever he is."

"We're going to take both of you," Blue Tam said. "Get your coats and gloves as
quickly as you can, and get in the wagon. We have a long way to go tonight."

It turned out to be a long way indeed. They went from Scotland to Siberia, from
Siberia to Singapore, and then to Slovenia, Sri Lanka, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, and Syria. When they finished with the S's, they started on
the T's, and when they finished the Z's, they started over again at
A. Everywhere they went they found mothers and fathers who wanted nothing more
than to see their Barbara or Boris or Beilu or Basa again. Somehow, they all
managed to fit into the wagon, though it became more and more crowded.

Finally Green Tam said, "That's the last one!"

"Good," said Blue Tam, sitting scrunched between a Ukrainian mother and a
Ugandan father. "Now, is everybody holding on? Hyah!" She snapped the reins with
her wrists, and the goats turned back toward their home.

They flew south under stars that glittered like crystals of ice until they saw
Antarctica lit up by the rising sun. A few moments later Red Tam pointed and
said, "There's the cave!"

"What will we do when we get there?" Green Tam asked Blue Tam.

"I don't know," Blue Tam admitted. She looked down at the ice cream cone that
she had carried all through the long night. "But I'm sure we'll think of
something."

The wagon landed gently on the ice. The goats pulled it into the cave, then
stood and waited patiently for someone to undo their harness and give them
something to eat.

Blue Tam climbed out and pointed up the stairs with the magic ice cream
cone. "All right, everyone," she bellowed. "Chaaaarge!"

They all raced up the stairs together. When they got to the top they saw that
Nackles had bricked over the doorway.. Red Tam didn't even slow down. Crash!
went the bricks as she ran right through them.

The parents swarmed out onto the floor behind her, calling their children's
names. Hundreds of boys and girls dropped what they were doing and stood there
dumbfounded, not believing their eyes. The penguin guards squawked and flapped
their wings, then jumped down the garbage chutes to escape.

"Look!" Red Tam suddenly gasped, pointing. Fred was standing by one of the
conveyor belts. His mother was trying to hug him, but he was just standing still
with his arms at his sides and a scowl on his face. His father stood beside
them, scowling as well.

"Oh no!" moaned Blue Tam. "He still doesn't believe!"

"No, and he won't, either," said a honey-sweet voice behind them. The three
sisters whirled around. There stood Nackles with a white paper mask over his
nose and mouth, rubbing his glasses on his sleeve.

"Get back!" Blue Tam warned him, waving the magic ice cream cone at him.

"Oh, I'm afraid that's not going to work this time," he said, tapping the mask
he wore with one finger. He pointed at Fred and his parents. "But just look at
them! Can you still doubt it? This is where they belong." He took one step
toward them, then another, talking all the while in his sweet, reasonable
voice. "This is where *you* belong, too. You know it's the truth. Why don't
you---"

But just then something truly magical happened. Fred's father looked at the
scowl on his son's face, and thought about the scowl he saw in the mirror every
morning when he shaved, and felt a sudden lump in his throat. Before he could
think about what he was doing, he put his arm around his son's shoulders. "Come
on," he said gently. "I've missed you. Let's go home."

"Aaaaarrrgghhh!" Nackles howled. In that instant, he felt his magical powers
vanish. The smell and taste of the magic ice cream cone flooded into the room as
parents and children started hugging each other, laughing and bursting into
tears at the same time.

"Yippee!" Green Tam and Red Tam cheered. "We did it! We---huh?"

Before their startled eyes, Blue Tam was growing taller and taller. Her hair
went from brown to gray, and tiny wrinkles and laugh lines etched themselves on
her face. It was---it was their mother, the witch!

"Oh, that's better," she said, exploring her face gently with her fingers. "I
was wondering if I'd ever be me again." She smiled at her daughters.

"But... but..." Green Tam stuttered.

"Just a moment please, dear," the witch said. She turned to Nackles, who was
watching his world come to an end without any expression on his face at
all. "That was quite some spell you put on me," she told him.  "And on all of
these children, too." She held the magic ice cream cone out to him. "Are you
sure you wouldn't like some of this?"

"Yes, I'm sure," he said, glaring at her.

"Why not?" the witch asked softly.

"Because I might like it," he snarled, "And *I* don't like *anything*." And with
that, he turned and walked away.

"Well, it was worth a try," the witch sighed. She reached out and tousled Red
Tam's hair fondly. "It's been a long time. I've missed you."

"We missed you too," Red Tam said, giving her mother a hug. "But why did you
turn yourself into Blue Tam?"

"I didn't mean to," the witch said, letting go of Red Tam and giving Green Tam a
big hug. "But after Nackles trapped me, all I could think about was how much I
wanted to be with you. Finally, I wanted it so much that his magic
short-circuited. Instead of making me like him, it made me like you." She hugged
them both at once. "I have to admit, it was a lot of fun."

Just then a gruff voice said, "Um, excuse us." The witch and her daughters
looked up to see Fred and his parents standing there.

"We just wanted to thank you," Fred's father said to Red Tam and Green Tam. "And
your other sister, too. Is she still here?"

"Not really," Red Tam started to say, but her mother spoke first.

"Absolutely," she said, putting her arm around her daughters. "And she's going
to have lots more adventures, I'm sure of it."

*Greg Wilson, 2001*
