"Look!" Armaend said, pointing. Thomas's magic boat hung over the
library like a condor floating on an updraft. Its crisp white sail
bellied out beneath a green and white pennant that fluttered and snapped
in the wind. Its hull was the color of a summer cloud; stylized eyes
were painted on the bow, and a scaly fish tail detailed in orange and
gold flipped up saucily on its blunt stern. The word *Presumption*
coiled above the fish tail, the letters carved into the hull and painted
black.

Thomas sat at the stern in his brocade coat with his hand on the rudder,
glancing over the gunwale every few heartbeats. Beaming widely, he waved
at the crowd gathering below. A few people waved back. Beside Piaerre,
Razi made a disgusted sound in the back of his throat before slipping
unnoticed back into the Captain's House.

As the *Presumption* settled to the ground, Vurt limped over to join his
grandson. "Quite a sight, isn't it?" he said, putting his hand on
Piaerre's shoulder. Piaerre nodded, entranced. The flying boat was the
most beautiful thing he had ever seen.

It landed as gently as a falling leaf. Thomas looped a heavy cord around
the rudder handle, stood up, straightened his ever-shifting jacket, and
swung himself over the side. For a heartbeat Piaerre thought he might
walk on the air, like a hero of ancient times, but his boots hit Slip
Street with a very ordinary thud. A few people clapped.

"Good morning," Thomas said in flawless Avauntois. "Could someone please
direct me to the library?" The pattern on his jacket shifted as he
spoke, looking like a field of grass one moment, a leafy jungle canopy
the next.

"It's right behind you," someone called out, pointing.

Thomas looked over his shoulder, then back at the crowd, mock-surprise
writ large on his face. "Really? Why, how fortunate then that I happened
to land here. I might never have found it otherwise. And you must be
Bosun Uyves---good morning, good morning."

"Morning," Uyves said, arms folded across his chest. "I take it you're
the magician."

"Oh, not *the* magician, surely," Thomas said modestly. "*A* magician,
perhaps, but not *the* magician."

"Mm. Well, welcome to Starboard Town. Mind if I ask what brings you
here?"

"Business, I'm afraid." Thomas actually sounded regretful. "I would of
course have preferred my first visit to take place under less strained
circumstances---one hears so much in Forecastle about how quaint the
mountain's villages are---but---don't touch that!"

His bark came too late. Matthieu had already put his hand on the flying
ship's rudder. Bright green flames instantly crackled up and down it. He
yelped and pulled his hand back. "Ow, ow, ow," he whimpered, his simple
face twisted with pain. "It burned me!" He unclenched the fist he had
made and stared at it. The skin was already blistering.

"You really should ask permission before playing with other people's
toys," Thomas said reprovingly. "Especially if those people are---ah,
Razi! There you are!"

Piaerre looked over his shoulder as Razi closed the gate to the
Captain's House garden. He was wearing the same tan desert *deel* he had
worn for months, but had his worn black traveling bag over his shoulder
as well as his satchel. A broad belt Piaerre had never seen before was
buckled around his waist; a green bottle hung from it at his hip. A
sword hilt wrapped in black shark leather protruded from the bottle's
mouth like an oversized stopper. Something cold put a hand on Piaerre's
heart. Razi was leaving.

"Thomas," he acknowledged. The townspeople hushed, as if watching an
impromptu play. The lean, dark man had been their guest for months, but
suddenly he seemed as much a stranger as the red-headed magician.

"You've already packed? Splendid, splendid, truly. The captain was most
insistent about the need for haste. It appears we are indeed headed for
that village, what's it called?" His hand fluttered helplessly. "I'm so
bad with names sometimes."

Behind him, Uyves said, "You mean Tinhead?"

Thomas's smile broadened as a murmur ran through the crowd. "Ah, so he
*did* tell you. Bravo!"

"Hoy, Uyves!" Mamaere Mayeule's voice was as sharp as one of her kitchen
knives. "What's this?"

"We're headed for some mining town called Tinhead," the bosun said
testily. "And don't look at me like that, I just found out myself. What
I still don't know is, where the weeping hell this place is, and why in
the name of all the saints who juggle are we going there?"

"Here," the bookster said, handing the bosun his map before Thomas could
reply. "I've traced our route, and made a mark for Tinhead. As for why
we are going there, *la*, I swear by my blood, if I knew, I would tell
you."

The bosun took the folded piece of paper without looking at it. "You
would, would you?"

"As I just said." Razi met his gaze calmly.

"That's splendid, really," Thomas said warmly. "Now, Razi, if you
please? We shouldn't keep the captain waiting."

Razi tossed his bag into the boat. As he reached for the gunwale, Thomas
said, "Oh, but wait. What about your apprentice?"

Razi's face twitched. "I beg your pardon?"

Ignoring him, Thomas tapped his lower lip with one finger. "Now where
is---ah!" He pointed at Piaerre. "There you are! I trust you're ready
too?"

Piaerre stared at Thomas blankly. Ready to---oh no. He couldn't really
mean that, could he? "Um..."

"He will not need to accompany us," Razi said firmly.

"Really? But they're always so *helpful*, your apprentices." The
magician's smile broadened. "Besides, there ought to be at least one
Avauntois on board, don't you think? Just to keep us both honest?"

Piaerre could almost hear the space between the two men's locked eyes
crackle. He looked for his parents in the crowd. His father's mouth was
working, as if three different sentences were wrestling to get out. His
maere's was set in a firm line that meant 'no and no argument'.

But then his papaere elbowed him. "Well?" he grinned. "What are you
waiting for?"

"What?" Elaiene exploded, pushing past the bosun. "Have you gone mad?
He's not going anywhere! And he's certainly not getting in *that*!"

Papaere Vurt snorted. "Looks a lot safer than what I rode up on.
Piaerre, go get your things. I'll talk to your maere."

"No! Piaerre, you stay right---Piaerre!" But her son was already pelting
down Slip Street.

What to take, what to take? That was all Piaerre could think about as he
ran for home. He slowed to a walk in front of Mamaere Mayeule's. Better
not to rush---he had to give his grandfather time to wear his mother down.
But then he set off at a run again, unable to contain himself.

He burst through the front door and took the stairs three at a time.
Where was his satchel? Gloves, a hat, his scarf, socks, underwear (both
pairs), his second shirt, the knife his father had given him when he
turned twelve... It didn't seem like very much. What else? Not the little
wooden elephant on his window sill. Not the map of Avaunt hanging over
his bed, that he had drawn two years ago. Oh, wait, his pen case. He
tossed it on top of his clothes and hurried back down the stairs.

People stared at him as he puffed up the street. There was envy on the
children's faces, and on no few of the adults' as well. He squared his
shoulders, awkward, excited, and proud.

His family was standing together in a knot a few strides from the boat.
Elaiene had her arm around Que√ßenne's shoulders; both of them looked
like they were about to cry.

His father and grandfather broke off their conversation as Piaerre
approached. "You can go," Laeuc said without preamble. "But you be
careful, understand? And you do exactly what Bookster Razi and Magister
Thomas tell you to."

"I will," Piaerre said breathlessly. He looked at his mother. "I
promise."

"Come here," Elaiene said. She hugged him fiercely. "I love you," she
whispered in his ear.

Piaerre nodded against her shoulder. "I will," he repeated. His own eyes
suddenly felt hot. He stepped away and turned to say goodbye to his
sister. To both of their surprise, she hugged him as well, quick and
awkward.

The bosun put out his hand. "Good luck, lad." Piaerre nodded again,
pressing his palm against Uyves', then his father's and grandfather's.

Razi and Thomas were already on board. Razi took the satchel his
apprentice handed up to him, sliding over to make room as Piaerre pulled
himself up over the side.

Thomas slipped the stay cord off the rudder. "Sit on the other side," he
ordered, his mocking smile absent for once. "We'll be off balance
otherwise. And hold onto the gunwale. Oh, and whatever you do, don't
stand up. Ready? Here we go."

He didn't do anything that Piaerre could see, but the sail suddenly
bellied out, full of wind. The boat rose smoothly and swiftly into the
air.

His knuckles white on the gunwale, Piaerre peered over the side. Below,
his family and others were waving. He waved back a little shakily. *So
this is what birds see,* he thought. It was different than looking down
on the world from Avaunt---closer, faster, and a thousand times more
exciting.

The Captain's House was a slate-roofed L, the carefully-tended shrubs in
its vanity garden tufts of green wool. In front of it, a lake of brown
faces looked up, some shading their eyes, others waving. A few people on
the fringes of the crowd had already turned away to go back to work.
Beneath them, Slip Street's cobbles made a crooked gray stream between
the canyon walls of the houses on either side. Goats bleated from
rooftops; chickens squawked and clucked in the coops that stood behind
every house; smoke rose from a double dozen chimneys, and kites
fluttered in the wind.

The boat's little green and white pennant snapped above the sail as they
climbed higher and higher. Starboard Town seemed so small, like
children's blocks left behind in the forest that blanketed the
mountainside. Piaerre craned his neck to see Mamaere Mayeule's yard,
then counted rooftops. Ten, eleven, twelve... That must his house there,
with a tidy stack of brush against the back wall, and two shirts and a
sheet drying on a line.

He leaned out slightly. He could see Papaere Vurt's verandah. Past that
was nothing but empty air. Vertigo suddenly rose in his throat as he
remembered Fraederiq falling ...

Thomas banked the boat to starboard. "Rather the view, isn't it?" he
said loudly. "Shall we go under?"

"What? I mean, pardon?"

"Shall we go under the mountain? It's quite spectacular."

"No," Razi said firmly. "Straight to Forecastle."

Thomas rolled his eyes at Piaerre and swung the rudder to the side. The
*Presumption* came about obediently. Piaerre suddenly realized that they
were sailing straight into the wind. He wasn't sure, but he thought that
was supposed to be impossible. *Then again,* he thought, *anyone who can
make a boat fly probably has a different notion of what 'possible'
means.*

The *Presumption* crested the ridge forward of town. All of a sudden
they weren't over the mountain any more. They were *beside* it.
Piaerre's ears were freezing, but he didn't think to put his hat on
until Razi pulled it out of his satchel and handed it to him. The
mountain was so big, so rich with detail. The sheet moss that hung on
the braided pines was northern, as were the pines themselves. The jungle
creeper vines that sprouted brown and yellow from tiny cracks in the
rock were from the south. The cold killed them off each time Avaunt went
north, but they recolonized its sheer sides when the mountain returned
to Mau Ngapcha.

And the birds---how could he not have realized there were so many birds?
Thousands of them nested in every nook and cranny they could find, on
ledges too narrow even for goats' feet, in the branches, or in round
nests made of mud and sticks that clung directly to the rock. Irvings
from the north, blue-crested cockatiels from the south, tiny brown
wrens, swifts with wings like a pirate's moustache, owls, petrels, and
others Piaerre couldn't name.

A tawny-crested gull suddenly appeared beside them, wings spread to hold
the breeze as it tilted its head to study the boat. No food there, it
decided, tipping to the side and soaring away with a disappointed cry.

Piaerre twisted around. Starboard Town had already disappeared behind
them. Everything human seemed insignificant compared to the mountain's
looming bulk. *We're just fleas on a whale's back,* he thought, with no
regard at all for zoology.

"*La*, over there," Razi said, pointing. "See?" Two orange-furred banana
trolls, mother and child from their size, swung from branch to branch
through the pines.

"Whoa," Piaerre said in awe.

Razi smiled. "They will have tales to tell when they get home, I think."

Piaerre gaped. "Do you think they're Gifted?"

"Ah? Oh, *la*, no, no, I just meant..." The bookster shook his head,
amused. "No, I'm sure they're not. They would have asked for sanctuary
by now if they were."

"Oh." Other than Jack, and the condors at the Hardeck, Piaerre had never
met a Gifted animal. A family of Gifted trolls on the mountain would
have been---

"Whoa!" He clutched the gunwale as the boat turned sharply---so sharply
that even Razi lurched a step.

"Thomas!" the bookster said sharply. "*La*, are you trying to---"

"Look!" the magician interrupted. "There, you see?"

For a moment Piaerre didn't understand what the magician was pointing
at, but then the darkness on the face of the cliff resolved itself. It
was the mouth of a tunnel, rectangular, tilted a quarter of an arc off
true. There were steps inside, on what was now the right-hand wall.

Beside the tunnel, two men in rough clothes were scrambling up the rock
face as fast as they could. Both wore climbing harnesses, which were
anchored by long ropes to trees growing above the tunnel mouth, and both
had axes in their hands. A moment later they dove into the undergrowth
and vanished from view.

Razi pointed at the tunnel mouth. "Can you take us closer?" he asked
Thomas.

The magician nodded briskly. "Your wish is my every desire. Best to hold
on, though, I should think. The wind might be a little playful."

'Playful' turned out to be an understatement. As they neared the cliff,
the air being shouldered aside by the mountain made the *Presumption*
dance like a scrap of cinnamon bark in a pot of boiling water. Thomas
held them as steady as he could twenty strides away from the rock while
they studied the opening. The tunnel mouth itself had been weathered
smooth by centuries of southern rain, desert grit storms, and northern
frost, but inside, the edges of the stairs were still sharp.

Clustered around it were a dozen or more freshly-cut stumps. *It would
have been hellish hard work*, Piaerre thought with grudging admiration.
Dangling in a harness as you swung the ax, having to watch that you
didn't chop through the rope you were hanging on... They must have been at
it for hours.

But something else was asking for his attention. Something about the
coat the bigger man had been wearing... "That was the Hett that was with
Jaromir!" he exclaimed. "When Gaeston and the others---when they were
chasing him!"

"Really? And who might Jaromir be?" Thomas asked.

"He's a Hett. A tinker. He's Vaszlav's new apprentice." Piaerre's words
tumbled over one another.

Razi studied the mountainside thoughtfully. "*La*, well, I think this
deserves the captain's notice, don't you?"

"Indeed," Thomas said. "Travel is *so* interesting, isn't it?" He smiled
at his passengers and nudged the rudder, setting the boat's course
forward once again.

* * *

They reached Forecastle's air dock an hour later. It was a weatherbeaten
pine shelf, ten strides deep and forty long, whose tree-trunk railing
posts doubled as stanchions. A small counterbalanced crane was the
dock's only guard; it was tiny compared to the four-story monsters at
Ruuda-in-Ruuda or Yadanapore, but adequate for the clouds, magic
carpets, and more unusual visitors the mountain received between its
northern and southern berths.

As they neared the dock, Thomas concentrated on steering the nimble
little boat across the wind of the mountain's passage, while Razi hung a
roll of canvas over the side of the *Presumption* as a bumper. He did it
without asking Thomas, Piaerre noticed, just as he had known where to
find a blanket to cover his legs when his toenails began to pale with
cold. *He tried to kill my previous apprentice.* Piaerre wiped drip off
his nose and hunched his shoulders inside his coat for warmth.

Razi stood on the gunwale as the *Presumption* nosed up to the dock,
stepping off it lightly as if there was an ocean to fall into, instead
of a gallop of empty air and jagged mountain peaks. While he tied the
boat up, Thomas lowered the sail, wrapped cords around it to hold it
against the boom, and snibbed the cabin hatch shut.

Shouldering an embroidered canvas bag, he waved Piaerre ahead. "After
you."
