<!-- start: 2017-10-21 -->
<!-- target: 75000 -->
<!-- deadline: 2017-12-20 -->
# The Bookster's Apprentice<br>Greg Wilson

*Take a squat pyramid of rock, four gallops square and two gallops
tall.  Lift it into the air, then tilt it back like an old man looking
up at a rooftop, so that its leading edge rises gently to the central
peak, while its stern drops so steeply that only goats, birds, and a
small village called Aft Landing can find a foothold.  Put a town of
some ten thousand souls on its bow, and smaller towns (not
villages–their inhabitants are quite definite about that) on its port
and starboard flanks.  Bash its underside against stationary mountains
until it's ragged, and let rain, snow, and windblown sand weather it
for a few thousand years.  That is Avaunt.*

*Now put it in motion.  Eight months north from Mau Ngapcha to Gandan
Berth, with half the world's chocolate in its warehouses, along with
cinnamon, cloves, silk, and cured bamboo as tough as stone.  Two weeks
on the ground, while merchants from all over northern Cherne elbow
past each other to make bargains, and then another eight months in the
air with grain, cider, wool, and steel for the south.*

*When the Pilots ruled the world, Avaunt roamed across the world.
After they destroyed themselves, it was taken over by wild-eyed
tinkers with a fascination for the Pilots' strange machines.  They
called themselves the Hett, and as the years passed, the people who
lived below them regarded them with growing suspicion.  Stories spread
of the Hett's hoarded wealth, and of the plots they must be hatching
to one day rule the world as the Pilots had.*

*Eventually, an ambitious young prince with few prospects at home
decided to do more than mutter.  The next time Avaunt landed at Gandan
Berth, the rag-tag army he had recruited attacked.  Most of the Hett
were slain outright.  The rest were driven off the mountain with
nothing but the clothes on their backs.  It was barely spring, and
bitterly cold, and few survived.*

*The Hett's storied wealth turned out to consist of scrap metal and
books no one knew how to read.  Undeterred, the prince retitled
himself the Captain of Avaunt, made his lieutenants bosuns, and gave
the Hett's houses and farms to his followers.  Most of them smoked,
drank, or gambled away their gifts, but the rest settled down to
trade, raise families, and watch the world slip past beneath them.*

*Now, look closer.  There, in Starboard Town.  Five hundred years have
passed; it is Redsday, the 11th of Peridot, 1261.  A girl is running
for her life.  She just felt the mountain shake for the first time in
centuries, but that's not what she's afraid of.  She's afraid of what
the boy chasing her will do to her if he gets his hands on her.*

Erileine raced down Slip Street twenty strides in front of her
pursuer.  She paid no attention to the frightened looks on the faces
of people she flew by.  "What just happened?" they asked one another.
The ground had shaken–had there been an avalanche?  But then why
hadn't there been any noise?  No one had noticed yet that the sun lay
fifteen degrees away from where it had been.  No one had realized that
for the first time since the Pilots fell, the flying mountain had
changed course mid-flight.

Past Donaien and Armaend's; past Fraederiq's house, where his father
Gaeston was just coming out onto the street, looking for someone to
blame for the bottles that had fallen off his shelves and shattered.
There–Mamaere Mayeule's tavern.  Erileine cut right into the little
alley that ran between it and the smokehouse next door.  She ran
blindly for a second, her eyes useless in the deep shadows after the
brightness of the morning, praying that Mamaere Mayeule hadn't left
any barrels out to air.

Fraederiq was only a dozen strides behind her when Erileine burst into
the little courtyard behind the tavern.  She jumped over a chair,
banged her knee against a second without stopping, and pulled herself
over the stone wall at the rear of the courtyard.  The mountain wasn't
quite as steep there as it was around most of Starboard Town.  It was
one of those places children were definitely not supposed to play,
which meant that she knew it as well as her tongue knew her teeth.
There was a narrow ledge thirty strides below that led to her
papaere's cottage.  She'd be safe if she could get there.  Safe for
the moment, anyway, and she could worry about what to do later then.

Fraederiq hardly broke stride as he flung himself over the wall behind
her.  Erileine glanced over her shoulder as she slipped and slid down
the slope, scraping her hands as she grabbed at bushes to slow herself
down.  Stones clattered past her as Fraederiq did the same.  It was
going to be close…

"Whoa!" she cried, almost sliding past the ledge before her sturdy
boots found purchase.  She grabbed hold of a strangle vine for
balance, yanked her arm away before the hungry plant could get a grip
on her, and quickstepped along the narrow shelf.

Fraederiq slid to a halt two heartbeats behind her.  A trickle of
bloody spit made a dark wet track through the dust on his face.  "You
little lump of nosewax!" he shouted.  "I'm going to throw you over the
side!"

The ledge was barely a handspan wide.  Pursued and pursuer both had to
shuffle, left foot to right, then right forward, hands grabbing
bushes, branches, roots, and outcroppings of rock for balance.

Erileine stumbled on a loose chip of stone.  "Go on, jump!" Fraederiq
yelled.  "Save me the trouble!"

"Jump yourself!" Erileine shouted back without turning her head.
There was nothing between her and the plains below but a gallop of
empty air.  Left foot, right, left, right… She could see her papaere's
cottage.  Just a few more steps, and–

Fraederiq's hand caught hold of her collar.  "Gotcha!" the older boy
said triumphantly.

"Let go!  Fraederiq, let go!  I'm going to fall!" Erileine wriggled
and tried to twist free, her shirt pulling free of her trousers as
Fraederiq yanked her back.

Fraederiq's ugly grin widened.  He let go of the roots he was holding
and pulled his hand back for a blow.

As he did so, the mountain shuddered again.  Fraederiq's eyes widened
in sudden terror as he lost his balance.  He let go of Erileine and
windmilled his arms.

"No!" Fraederiq shouted.  He reached out desperately, but Erileine was
frozen against the mountainside.  Off balance, his arms still
flailing, Fraederiq toppled backward into space and plummeted toward
the dry earth below.

Erileine clung to the mountain.  "No, no, no…" she moaned, squeezing
her eyes shut so hard that speckles swirled beneath their lids.  Her
arms tried to drive her fingers into the rock, to root her in the
mountain so that she wouldn't fall too.  This couldn't be happening.
Fraederiq couldn't be gone, not like that.  How could Fraederiq just
*fall*?  And–and why hadn't she reached out to grab him?

She bit her lip, her body shuddering as she tried to control her sobs.
She had to tell someone.  She had to get out of there before the
mountain shook again.

She took a deep, unsteady breath and forced her hands to relax, only
then realizing that they were sticky with blood.  She had scraped her
palms and fingers raw on the mountain.  Her forehead too–she must have
ground her face against the cliffside.

She turned her head to see how far it was to the end of the ledge.
Twenty strides, maybe less.  She could do that.  She had to.

She stood there, the wind of the mountain's passage ruffling her hair,
until she stopped shaking.  With her face and chest pressed against
the rough, indifferent rock, she edged toward her papaere's one step
at a time.  Each time she moved her feet, she had to force herself to
peel her hands off the mountain.  The air around her was filled with
the trills and caws of panicked birds.  She felt oddly disconnected,
as if her body was moving itself and she was just watching.

The ledge finally merged with a steep hillside littered with sturdy
deep-rooted shrubs for her to hold onto.  Without warning, the last of
her breakfast rose in her throat.

A minute later, she spat in a vain attempt to clear the taste from her
mouth, then wiped dust, sweat, blood, and tears from her face with the
tail of her shirt.  What–Pilots and saints, what was she going to tell
Fraederiq's father?

Erileine stumbled shakily toward her papaere's cottage.  Pine branches
slapped her face in silent reproach.  She had been right there.  Why
hadn't she just put out her hand?  He might have pulled her off the
mountain with him, but that would be better than– better than– She
doubled over, heaving.

Vurt was on his verandah, cursing in a flat monotone when his
granddaughter stumbled out of the trees.  "Eri!" he exclaimed,
dropping the old crossbow he'd been trying to reassemble onto the
scarred table beside him.

Erileine collapsed into her papaere's arms.  "Eri?  Eri!" Vurt shook
her.  "Frogs on stilts, girl, you look like you've been a ghost!  Are
you all right?"

Erileine shook her head.  "I– we– Papaere, he fell.  F-F-Fraederiq
fell.  When the m-m-mountain…" She buried her face in her papaere's
chest, her body racked by sobs again.

"What?" Vurt took Erileine's shoulders and gently pushed her back to
study her face.  "Who fell?"

"F-F-Fraederiq.  We were–" Words failed her.  She jerked her head back
the way she had come.

"*Saad*," Vurt cursed.  "Are you sure?  Maybe he only slipped down a
ways."

Erileine shook her head miserably.  "No, I s-s-saw him.  He *fell*."
She wiped her nose on her sleeve.  "Papaere, what happened to the
mountain?"

"I don't know," Vurt said grimly.  "But it knocked me right over.  And
look." He pointed at the sky.  The sun was almost hidden behind the
roof of his cottage.  "We've changed course.  I'm guessing it's about
a quarter of an arc.  If your paere didn't still have my
weeping-be-damned sextant, I'd know better." His face darkened.  "Now,
tell me what happened."

A flock of plausible lies flew through Erileine's mind.  "We were on
the ledge below Mamaere Mayeule's," she confessed miserably.  "He was
chasing me, and I thought if I could get here I'd be all right, but he
w-would have caught me if I'd come straight down Slip Street, so I–"
She broke off, unable to meet her papaere's eyes.

Vurt waited, his face expressionless.  "I went over her back wall,"
Piaerre finished dully.  "He came after me.  We were halfway here when
it happened."

Vurt studied his granddaughter's face.  "You know you're not supposed
to go there."

"I know," Erileine said wretchedly.  "I'm sorry." Suddenly her eyes
widened.  "What about maere and paere?  And Queçenne?" She turned to
run up the stairs that led from Vurt's cottage to the lower end of
Starboard Town's single street.

Vurt caught her arm.  "Hang on a heartbeat.  You can't go up there
looking like that–you'll give your mother a fright.  Go inside and
clean up a bit.  There's water in the jug." He pushed his
granddaughter toward the cottage's front door, then stooped over to
pick up his crossbow, wincing as his knee cracked.

A moment later, the old brass wash jug clanged down on his kitchen
table, empty.  The door opened.  "You ready?" Vurt asked.

Erileine goggled at him, her dark face scrubbed clean but her eyes
still red from weeping.  "Papaere–what are you doing?"

Vurt frowned.  "What does it look like I'm doing?"

Erileine looked at the sword slung at her grandfather's side, the
loaded crossbow in his hands, and the polished teak fangs of the
ankle-biter sticking out of the worn leather pack on his back.
"Starting a war?"

Vurt's frown turned to an angry.  "Funny girl.  I'd rather have it and
not need it than need it and not have it, that's all.  Now come on."
He turned toward the stairs.

Piaerre hesitated.  "What's wrong?" Vurt asked.

"Papaere–what am I going to tell Gaeston?"

Her grandfather's mouth twisted.  "I don't know, love.  Never have.
Now come on–your maere will be fretting herself sick."

---

The day started like any other.  Sunshine meant it was morning.
Morning meant Erileine had to get out of bed.  She rubbed the grit
from her eyes and rolled over, luxuriating in a last few moments of
warmth.

The gumminess in her mouth told her that she had read past midnight
once again.  The book responsible sat on the stool beside her
low-framed bed; the thumb-sized piece of dayglass that had been her
nightlight when she was little lay on top of it, still glowing faintly
with the remains of the previous day's sunlight.

She yawned and sat up, wrapping the quilt around her shoulders.
Vaszlav would arrive soon, if he wasn't already in his usual spot
outside Mamaere Mayeule's.  Erileine groped under the quilt for her
pants and shirt on, then slipped the book she'd borrowed on the
peddler's previous visit into her satchel and went downstairs.

"Morning," her father Laeuc said.

"Morning," Erileine replied, yawning again.  Her father had already
been up for hour or more carving fine curlicue details on the shaft of
a bamboo flute.

"You going to see Vaszlav?"

"Mm hm." Erileine eyed the heel of potato bread that lay forgotten on
a plate at her father's elbow.  "Are you going to eat that?"

"No, go ahead." Laeuc scored a quarter circle in the flute, then held
it up and squinted at it critically.  "Don't forget you have to finish
the fence today."

"I won't." Slipping the bread into his pocket, Erileine headed out the
front door.

She stood blinking for a moment in the sharp light of the mountain
morning.  It was earlier than she'd thought–Slip Street was almost
empty.  She was tempted to go back to bed, or to sit and watch her
father carve, but then she heard a rooster crow from Armaend and
Donaien's yard.  Her mother would be up soon, and would undoubtedly be
able to find chores for an idle child.  If her sister Queçenne was the
only one in the house…  She took a deep breath.  Wood smoke, the tang
of pine, and a hint of spring–it was a fine day for her sister to do
chores.

Slip Street ran the length of Starboard Town, as crooked as a dropped
piece of string.  It was paved from top to bottom with rounded gray
cobblestones, each as large as Erileine's two hands put together.
Weeding them was the bosun's favorite punishments for minor offenses,
which meant that Erileine had pulled up more burlicks and snowdelions
than most of Starboard Town's children, invariably muttering, "But I
didn't mean to," under her breath.

The houses crowded shoulder-to-shoulder on either side of the street
had steep roofs for the snows of northern winters and large shuttered
windows to let in the breeze during the hot southern summers.  Their
whitewashed walls were spackled with brightly-painted doors, each
unique: orange and gray, blue and red, a diamond pattern of black on
gold.  A man-tall door soldier made of wood and straw stood guard
beside each, each in a carefully-mended uniform whose colors matched
those of the door.  Every storyteller on the mountain had a different
explanation for the custom; all anyone really knew was that they made
them because their grandparents had.

Above the narrow street flew the town's kites.  The townspeople
launched them when the mountain left Mau Ngapcha, with wishes written
on their bamboo cross-struts.  A few had already fallen, or been blown
away by storms, but most still dipped and swayed in the steady breeze
of the mountain's northward journey.

Erileine touched two fingers to her lips and pointed them at the blue,
orange, and yellow paper diamond holding station downwind from her
family's chimney.  "Next year in Gandan," she whispered.  Next year in
the greatest school in the world, surrounded by books and scholars, a
place where no one thought you were strange if you knew what
"loquacious" meant…

A cream-and-chocolate goat bleated at Erileine from a nearby rooftop,
then lowered its head to nibble the moss between its feet.  Two
startled irvings fluttered away like leaves in a sudden hurricane,
returning a heartbeat later to peck at the goat's leavings.  Hitching
her satchel's strap higher on her shoulder, she ambled up the street
to Mamaere Mayeule's.

Vaszlav was just starting to set up when Erileine arrived.  "Clear
day, young *sra*," the old Hett tinker puffed, slipping his heavy pack
off his shoulders and touching his hairline respectfully.

"'Day, Vaszlav," Erileine replied.  "Did you find the other Farberre
book?"

"Ah, that…" Vaszlav shrugged apologetically.  "I'm sorry, but the
fellow wouldn't lend it out.  Offered him half a quarter-ring, like
you said, and promised he'd get the full worth of it if there was so
much as a smudge on the back page, but he said it was the only copy he
had."

"Oh." Downcast, but also somewhat relieved that she wouldn't have to
spend a week's allowance on something she would probably read in a
single evening, Erileine leaned against Mamaere Mayeule's and watched
the old man take his pack's bamboo frame apart with a speed born of
long practice.

She turned at the sound of footsteps on the cobblestones to find a
second Hett had come up behind her.  "Clear day," Erileine said
politely.

The Hett nodded.  "And to you." He was younger than Vaszlav–perhaps in
his twenties, or early thirties.  Where the older Hett was wiry, the
newcomer looked as sturdy as a cart ox, with the top two buttons of
his shirt undone, and a sleeveless vest over top of it instead of the
full coat that Vaszlav wore no matter what weather the mountain was
flying through.  His curly hair and dark eyes were as unremarkable as
his homespun clothes, but there was a stillness about him that
unsettled Erileine.

Vaszlav cleared his throat.  "This is Jaromir, my new apprentice.  And
this *sra* is Erileine Saedanne é Laeuc, the most voracious reader on
Avaunt."

The Hett nodded.  It was definitely a nod, not Vaszlav's deferential
dip of the head.  "Shall I set up here?" he asked the older Hett.

"Please." Vaszlav handed his apprentice two pieces of bamboo.  "Here.
Idiot things must have warped with the wet.  See if you can sort them
out."

A small knot of people gathered while the two Hett put Vaszlav's stall
together and set out his wares, each explaining to the next who
Jaromir was.  Bored, Erileine counted the cobblestones beneath her
feet.  Two, four, six… eighteen, twenty–Slip Street was twenty
cobblestones wide.  She frowned.  How many there were on the whole
street?  Her papaere or the bookster would have thought it would be
fun to figure it out.  Not the townspeople around her, though–they
would just roll their eyes and trade amused looks with each other.

Or worse.  Her stomach sank as he saw Fraederiq and Niquolas coming
toward him.  The three of them had been friends when they were
younger, but then Fraederiq's mother had run off, intoxicated (some
said) by the whispered poetry of a Bantangui cinnamon merchant, and
weary of her husband's endless arguments.  Now sixteen, Fraederiq
hadn't just grown taller and stronger: he'd grown angry too, angry at
the whole world.  As always, Niquolas had followed suit, rolling up
his sleeves the way Fraederiq did, throwing stones when Fraederiq
threw them, and sneering at whatever stirred the older boy's
displeasure that day.

As the only other child their age in Starboard Town, and with a head
full of odd facts, Erileine was resigned to being their favorite
target.  Lately, though, it had seemed as if Fraederiq was trying to
be nice to her.  That worried Erileine more than the surreptitious
trippings and knucklings she'd grown used to.  She slid behind Armaend
and Donaien, who were lost in one of their interminable discussions
about cooking, but it was too late.

"Day." Fraederiq's greeting was just a grunt.

"Day." Erileine stuck her hands in her pockets.  The less she said…

Fraederiq jerked his chin at Vaszlav's stall.  "Anything better than
the usual junk this time?"

Erileine shrugged.  "I dunno."

Fraederiq's eyes narrowed.  "Who's he?" he asked, pointing at Jaromir.

"Vaszlav's apprentice."

"Huh.  Another stupid newcomer.  My paere says there's too many new
Hett on the mountain."

Erileine shrugged again.  Fraederiq's father, Gaeston, said many
things, few of them kind.  She was saved from having to think of
another noncommittal answer by the ringing of Vaszlav's chime.  "Clear
day, good morning, *mingala ba*," he said, as he always did.  "Please,
good *sra*, how many I help you today?"

Erileine cast a quick eye over the odds and ends on display, seeing
nothing she hadn't seen before.  As she turned to go, Fraederiq caught
her arm.  She stiffened, waiting for a knuckle-twist in her ribs.
Instead, Fraederiq nodded brusquely at Vaszlav's shelves.  "What do
you think of that barrette?" he asked.

"What?"

"That barrette," Fraederiq repeated impatiently.  "Think it's any
good?  My paere says a lot of what the Hett sell is junk.  I don't
want to waste good money on junk."

Bemused, Erileine looked at the little hair clip.  It didn't look like
much of anything to her, just two fingers of polished wood held
together by a bent tin spring.  "I guess it's all right to me."

"I think it's junk," Niquolas sneered.

Fraederiq silenced him with a look.  "You think someone like Queçenne
would like it?"

Erileine blinked.  "Um… I don't know," she said weakly.

Fraederiq scowled.  "Come on.  She's your sister, you ought to know."

Erileine shrugged helplessly.  Sharing a house with Queçenne didn't
mean she knew how her sister *thought*.  "I don't know," she repeated.
"Why don't you ask her?" *Or jump off the mountain,* she added to
herself.  The thought that Fraederiq might care what Queçenne liked
and didn't like was deeply unsettling.

"Pfah.  You're useless." Fraederiq let go of her arm and slipped past
Armaend and Donaien, who were still arguing about the best way to chop
onions when making curry.  "How much is that?" he asked Vaszlav,
pointing at the barrette.

"This?" Vaszlav handed it to Fraederiq.  "It's quite the pretty, isn't
it?  Thindi, not Bantangui–on my blood, that's real mahogany.  I could
let you have it for three quarter rings."

"What?  For this trash?" Fraederiq scowled.  "It's not worth half
that.  Here." He pulled a string of coins out of his pocket, untied
it, and held out a pair of quarter-ring coins.  "I'll give you half a
ring for it, how's that?"

Vaszlav spread his hands helplessly.  "I am sorry, *sra*, but I
cannot.  I paid two quarters five pence for it myself, and–"

"What about goods in trade?" Niquolas interrupted.  He elbowed
Fraederiq.  "We've been doing some carving, haven't we?  We figure
they'll fetch half a ring each.  Give you three now, that's…" He
paused, his fingers moving against his trouser leg.

"A ring and a half," Erileine supplied automatically.

Before Vaszlav could reply, Jaromir spoke up.  "What kind of carvings
these are?"

Niquolas glanced around.  "Heads," he said conspiratorially.  "For
door soldiers.  We're making them out of coconut shells.  They're
really scary–still have all the hair on and everything.  People are
going to pay a fortune for them, you'll see."

"That sounds interesting," Jaromir said, his tone saying more than his
words.  "Perhaps we could take a look at some before making any
agreement?"

"Hells, keep the damned thing." Fraederiq tossed the barrette at
Vaszlav.

As quick as a cobra, Jaromir snatched it out of the air and put it
back in its place on the stall.

Erileine caught her breath.  What Fraederiq had done had been rude,
but what Jaromir had done had been a challenge, and Hett didn't
challenge Avauntois, not if they knew what was good for them.

She glanced at Fraederiq, expecting to see the glare she had been on
the receiving end of so many times herself.  Instead, the corner of
Fraederiq's mouth had curled up.  "Nice catch," he said.  Without
another word he turned and walked away, whistling.

Erileine's heart sank.  She knew that whistle.  It meant that
Fraederiq had a plan, and that was never good news.

---

Erileine spent the rest of the morning mending the bamboo fence that
kept the rabbits out of her family's vegetable garden.  When the
Hett's chimes sounded at noon to signal that his visit was over, she
hung her hammer on the fence and squeezed into the narrow gap between
her house and the one next to it.

The sweat on Erileine's face and arms chilled instantly in the cool
shadows.  She inched toward Slip Street.  If she stopped just *here*,
she could see Fraederiq's house without being seen herself.

Vaszlav and Jaromir trudged past with their packs on their backs.  A
heartbeat later, the door Erileine was watching opened.  Fraederiq
stepped onto the street and set off after the two Hett.

"Great," Erileine muttered.  Now what was she going to do?  Tell the
bosun that she didn't like the look Fraederiq had on his face three
hours ago?  Wishing she could whisper in someone's ear from halfway
across the world like a magician, she followed Fraederiq.

At the top of Slip Street, the Hett turned right onto Forecastle Road.
Fifty strides behind them, Fraederiq hopped the fence into Papaere
Badette's bedraggled front garden.  Erileine's heart sank.  That was
the shortcut to the upper goat pasture–Fraederiq was definitely trying
to catch up with the Hett, out of sight of the rest of the town.

"Afternoon, young bookster.  Shouldn't you be up at the captain's
house?" The booming voice made Erileine jump.

"Afternoon, bosun." She touched her fingers to his hairline in a
hurried salute.  "I'm, um, I'm mending the fence."

The bosun raised his eyebrows.  "Really?  Looked to me like you were
standing in the middle of the street."

"Yes, bosun." Erileine swallowed.  "It's just…" *Fraederiq will kill
me,* she thought bleakly.  "It's just, I think there's a problem."

If Erileine hadn't sounded so miserable, the bosun wouldn't have
believed her.  After all, this was the girl who once claimed that
she'd been kidnapped by a pack of banana trolls.  But when Erileine
mentioned Jaromir catching the thrown barrette, the bosun nodded.
"Heard about that," he grunted.  "Damn cheeky of him."

"Yes, *sra*," Erileine said, not sure whether the bosun was referring
to Fraederiq or Jaromir.

Bosun Uyves sucked on his front teeth for a moment.  "Up to the goat
pasture, eh?  All right.  Let's go see what's happening."

"But–"

The bosun raised a finger.  Just one, but it was enough.  Erileine
closed her mouth with a snap.  How did she get herself into these
things?

There was an even shorter shortcut to the pasture, one that involved
scrambling up a near-vertical rock face near the pit where the
villagers dumped the gleanings from their toilets.  Once at the top,
the bosun reached down, grabbed Erileine's wrist, and pulled her up
like a sack of yams.  He tapped his finger to his lips, then slipped
into the trees.  Erileine followed helplessly.

The dense carpet of fallen needles underfoot muffled their steps.
Suddenly Erileine heard voices ahead.  "Actually, I'm saving you
money," Fraederiq said.  "I mean, the fine would be what, two crowns?
Maybe three?  Hells, the bosun might even shackle you for a week.
Giving me that piece of trash seems cheap by comparison, doesn't it?"

Erileine and the bosun were close enough to hear Vaszlav clear his
throat.  "If you put it that way…"

"No," Jaromir said firmly.

Erileine gingerly moved a branch out of her way.  Fraederiq was
standing in the middle of the road with his back to the bushes
Erileine and the bosun were hiding behind.  The Hett were facing him,
their oversized packs on their shoulders.  A frightened smile was
fixed on Vaszlav's face, but Jaromir's arms were crossed, and his
expression stony.

Fraederiq tsk'd.  "Well then, I suppose there's nothing I can do
except go and tell the bosun."

"Tell me what?" Uyves asked, stepping onto the road.  As Fraederiq
whirled around, Erileine saw Jaromir flick his hand to toss something
into the bushes beside him.

"Clear day, bosun," Vaszlav said nervously.  "We, um, we were just–"

"Tell me what?" the bosun repeated, ignoring him.

Fraederiq jerked his thumb over his shoulder at Jaromir.  "He's
wearing a homestone.  I saw it when they were in town."

"Did you now?" Uyves' eyes never left Fraederiq's face.  "Funny you
didn't mention it then."

Fraederiq shrugged.  "I just wanted to be sure."

The bosun's hand shot out to grab Fraederiq's collar and yank him up
onto his toes.  "You want to be sure of something, be sure of this,"
the bosun growled into the struggling boy's ear.  "Taking fines is the
captain's business, and no one else's.  I ever catch you doing it
under your own sail, you will be chopping wood until your hands bleed.
Understood?"

"Yes, *sra*," Fraederiq said sullenly, touching his finger to his
hairline.

The bosun pushed him away.  "Good.  Now be off with you."

"Yes, *sra*," he repeated.  As he turned to go, he shot Erileine a
look that was as cold as a dead snake's heart.

"So," the bosun said to the Hett.  "What's this about a homestone?"

Jaromir shrugged without uncrossing his arms.  "I am not wearing one,
*sra*."

"Mm hm." The bosun beckoned him forward.  "Open your shirt."

Wordlessly, the Hett undid his vest, then his shirt, and held them
open.  Other than a healthy crop of chest hair, there was nothing to
see.

"So where is it?" the bosun asked.

Jaromir lowered his arms and began buttoning his shirt.

"I said, where is it?" the bosun repeated sharply.

Vaszlav wrung his hands.  "*Sra*, if my apprentice–"

"Quiet, old man.  I'm not talking to you." The bosun cracked a
knuckle.  "Hells.  All right, you're not wearing one, but I don't
think the boy would have made it up out of nothing.  Half a crown, or
ten days, take your pick."

Vaszlav opened his mouth to protest, but Jaromir cut him off.  "As you
say, bosun.  May I pay in parts?"

"Just as long as I have it before we berth," Uyves replied.

The Hett dipped his head.  "On my blood."

Uyves waited a heartbeat for the '*sra*' that should have followed.
When it didn't, he glanced at Vaszlav.  "Pretty sure of himself, isn't
he?"

The older Hett dipped his head nervously in apology.  "He is still new
to the mountain, *sra*.  He means no offense."

"Mm.  Well, best be on your way."  Uyves turned to Erileine and
clapped her on the shoulder.  "Good work, lass."

"Thanks," Erileine mumbled.  She could already imagine Fraederiq's
hands around her throat…

With a final nod to Vaszlav, Uyves turned back toward Starboard Town.
As soon as he rounded the corner, Jaromir set his pack down and and
fished his homestone out of the bushes where he'd thrown it.

"Wonderful," Vaszlav said tiredly.  "Perhaps you could have waited
until the young *sra* was not here?"

Jaromir glanced at Erileine as he hung the homestone around his neck.
It was a flat lozenge of polished granite, half again as tall as it
was wide, with a hole drilled near the top for a cord.  Many of the
Hett who had come to the mountain the past few years wore them.  For
luck, for good health, because it had been their grandmother's,
because all the other Hett were doing it–there were as many
explanations as there were stones, and as many complaints about the
practice as there were Avauntois who would rather not have any Hett on
the mountain at all.

As a sop to the more outspoken among them, the captain had ordered a
handful of homestones tested for magic.  When none was found, he
banned them anyway, ordering a fine for a first offense, and expulsion
from the mountain for a second.  *And here I am looking at one*,
Erileine thought.  She should have stuck to mending the fence.

"Don't worry," she said aloud to Vaszlav.  "I won't say anything."

"Thank you, young *sra*," the Hett replied gratefully.  "Now, if you
will excuse us?  We will be two days to Forecastle with these packs."

"Sure.  See you in two weeks." She raised a hand in farewell.

Suddenly aware that she was going to be late for her lesson at the
captain's house, Erileine walked quickly.  She jumped as a macaw
squawked at her from a branch overhead, instantly angry at it for
making her heart pound.  Stooping, she picked up a stone and threw it
at the brightly colored bird.  "Go home," she said loudly.  The macaw
squawked again and flapped away, wondering in its little bird mind why
the trees smelled so strange and why the nights were so cold.  A few
jungle creatures were always caught on the mountain when it left Mau
Ngapcha.  Sometimes the townspeople caught them and sold them as pets
or delicacies at Gandan Berth.  Better that than letting them starve
or freeze to death, they told one another.

Erileine heaved a sigh of relief when she reached Slip Street.  People
were stringing beans and weeding potatoes in the terraced fields on
either side of town.  He waved hello to the few who noticed her, but
didn't stop to chat.

The Captain's House watched over Starboard Town from the top of Slip
Street like a shepherd watching her flock.  The old captain had still
been living there when Erileine was born.  After his death, it had
been empty until Razi had arrived to catalog its eclectic collection
of old books and yellowing papers.

That morning, the walled garden in front of the house was a riot of
purple and orange flowers.  Bees buzzed back and forth among them in
busy ecstasy.  Erileine paused at its front gate–the only iron gate in
Starboard Town–to catch her breath.  As she reached for the latch, a
meaty fist struck the side of her head.

She yelped, staggering under the blow.  Strong hands grabbed her
jacket and pulled her into the shadowed alley next to the garden wall.

Erileine oophed as Fraederiq slammed her against the stone wall.  "You
little slug," he hissed, his face so close that Erileine could feel
the moist warmth of his breath.  "Who the hells do you think you are?
Eh?  You think you're better than the rest of us because of all that
cake you read?"

"Let go of me!" Erileine struggled helplessly.  Fraederiq jerked her
toward him and slammed her back into the wall.

"Didn't anyone ever tell you to mind your own business?" Fraederiq
twisted Erileine's collar tight with his left hand and punched her in
the ribs with his right.  "Eh?  Didn't anyone… ever… tell you…  not…
to stick…  your nose… where it doesn't… belong?"  Fresh blows
punctuated the sentence.

"Let me go!  Let me go or I'll tell!" Erileine threw a desperate punch
of her own.  He was as surprised as Fraederiq when it grazed the older
boy's cheek.

Fraederiq caught Erileine's wrist and drove Erileine's hand into her
own face.  "Ow!  Oh, stop, Erileine!  Stop, please, you'll hurt
yourself!" Again and again Fraederiq punched Erileine in the face with
her own fist.  Hot tears stung Erileine's eyes.  She opened his mouth
to yell for help.

And without warning, the mountain lurched beneath them.

---

By the time they reached Mamaere Mayeule's, half of Starboard Town was
standing in the street, anxiously asking the other half why the
mountain had changed course and what it meant.  "I don't know!" Bosun
Uyves repeated loudly.  His voice was as big as his shoulders were
broad, but even he could barely make himself heard above the hubbub.
"I don't know anything more than you do.  No, the captain didn't tell
me this was going to– Yes, I'm sure he knows.  No, I mean, I'm sure he
knows it's happened, not I'm sure he knew it was going to– Salt and
scissors, Vurt, what in Luck's name is all that for?"

The townspeople turned to gape at the old man.  "What, this?" Vurt
said, glancing down at his crossbow.  "I just thought– You know,
better safe than sorry."

"Safe from what?" someone asked.

Vurt scowled.  "If I knew, I wouldn't be standing here, would I?"

"Let's just keep our ideas to ourselves," the bosun said loudly,
glaring at the crowd.  "And thank your favorite saints that we got off
with nothing worse than sprained ankles and broken crockery."

Erileine felt as though she was going to throw up again.  Before she
could speak, someone spun her around and pulled her into a hug.  "Eri!
Are you all right?"

She disentangled herself.  "I'm fine, maere," she said, embarrassed.
"I'm fine.  Where's Queçenne?"

"Helping with Matthieu," Laeuc said from beside his wife.  "They were
hoeing beans when it happened.  Matthieu's still frightened, so
they're trying to calm him down.  Like the bosun said, it's lucky no
one was really hurt."

"I wish that was true," Vurt said.  He caught the bosun's eye.

The scowl fell from Uyves' face as Vurt's words sunk in.  "Quiet!" he
bellowed.  "Quiet, dammit!"

His tone accomplished what volume alone could not.  As the crowd fell
silent, Vurt stepped forward to put his hand on Gaeston's arm.  "I'm
sorry.  Saints and all their stories, man, I'm sorry.  Fraederiq and
Erileine were down by my place when it happened.  Fraederiq went over
the side."

"Oh, no," someone whispered.  Someone else started to cry.  The shock
on the bosun's face mirrored that on Gaeston's.

"What?" Gaeston said helplessly.

Vurt squeezed his arm, never taking his eyes away from Gaeston's.
"I'm sorry," he repeated.

Without warning, Gaeston knocked Vurt's arm away.  "Hold on, there,"
the bosun said sternly, grabbing Gaeston's sleeve.  "Just hold on.  It
isn't *his* fault."

"What the hells was my boy doing down by *your* place?" Gaeston
demanded.

"Never mind that," the bosun ordered.  "Get your climbing gear.
Laeuc, Donaien–everyone, get rigged and get moving." With a speed born
of many late-night searches for missing goats, the bosun quickly
organized a search party.

Erileine stood silently beside her mother, forgotten in the rush.  She
still felt sick.  Why hadn't she grabbed Fraederiq's hand?  And what
was going to happen to her when the bosun had a moment to stop and
think?  Half the town must have seen Fraederiq and Erileine running
down Slip Street.  Would they think she had pushed him?

Wait.  "Where's Razi?" she asked.  "Where's the bookster?" How could
she have forgotten her teacher?  The shelves in the Captain's House
were mahogany, as tough and as heavy as iron.  If one of them had
fallen on his head…

"*La*, Razi is fine." The lilting voice behind Erileine made her jump.
She spun around and gasped with relief.

The bookster was as tall as the bosun, but as narrow as the bosun was
wide.  His skin was desert-black instead of mountain-brown, all except
his palms, which were a startling pink.  In place of the Avauntois'
boots, trousers, shirts, and colorfully-embroidered vests, he wore a
tan ankle-length robe that he called a *deel*, a wide woven leather
belt, and thick-soled sandals.  He had arrived in Starboard Town just
after it left Mau Ngapcha four months ago with a note from the captain
saying that he was to inspect and catalog the house's library.
Erileine had become his apprentice three days later.

As always, the expression on Razi's face was somehow cheerful and
melancholy at the same time.  He dipped his head toward the bosun.  "I
am sorry to hear of the young man's passing.  I regret I did not know
him well."

"Don't go building his pyre just yet," Uyves said sharply.  "He could
have got lucky." Razi dipped his head again but did not reply.

The search lasted an hour.  It would have been half that, but no one
wanted to be the first to give up.  There was nowhere for Fraederiq to
be–no lonely trees, no outcroppings, nothing.  "I'm sorry," the bosun
said quietly to Gaeston, squeezing his shoulder as Vurt had done.
Dry-eyed, Fraederiq's father slung his ropes over his shoulder and
walked slowly up Slip Street to his empty home.  He didn't look at
Erileine as he passed.

As the searchers returned to town they gathered in Mamaere Mayeule's,
which served by turns as Starboard Town's inn, its general store when
the weather was too bad for tinkers and pack-traders to set up their
stalls on Slip Street, and its meeting hall.  Built for weddings and
birthdays, its main room couldn't hold half of the two hundred or more
people trying to crowd into it to look at the map Razi had brought
down from the Captain's House.

"Stop shoving!" the bosun thundered.  "Mayeule, open the shutters so
people can hear.  Kings and their collars, I said *stop shoving!*"

Miraculously, people did.  Erileine found herself pinned against the
edge of a table with half a dozen people peering over her shoulders
and half a dozen more peering over theirs.

Beside him, Razi seemed oblivious to the press.  He unfolded a stiff
sheet of parchment to make a square an arm's length across.  The map's
colors had faded with age, and the gall ink used for the lettering had
gone brown, but the straight blue line that showed the mountain's path
across the face of Cherne was as clear as the day it was drawn.

The bosun put a salt shaker on the blue line.  "So, let's say we're
here.  From what I can tell, we're heading north of northeast instead
of pure north.  If we stay on this course–"

"What if we turn again?" someone called out.

"I said if, didn't I?" Uyves growled.  He tapped the inverted
triangles marking the mountains that defined the border between the
great plains of Darp and the patchwork quilt of princedoms, dukedoms,
and my-back-yarddoms that was Praczedt.  "*If* we stay on the course,
we'll hit the Brumosos in a couple of weeks at most."

"Did he say we were going to hit the mountains?" "Saints, we're going
to crash into a mountain!" "We'll be crushed like bugs!"

"We are *not* going to *hit* anything!" the bosun bellowed.  "And the
next person who says we are will spend the rest of this trip pulling
weeds!"

In the hush that followed, Erileine said, "Do you think–" She stopped
himself.

The bosun raised his eyebrows warningly.  "Do I think what?"

"Nothing, *sra*."

"Come on, lass, spit it out."

Erileine swallowed.  "Do you think something might have happened to
Gandan?  I mean, maybe the mountain's turning around because there's
nowhere for it to berth any more."

"Saints and their songs," someone gasped.  "My Chaentelle is
'prenticing there."

Erileine winced under the bosun's glare.  "Or maybe–"

Razi elbowed her ribs.  "*La*, or perhaps the mountain is thirsty," he
said loudly.  "Like a camel.  Once they decide they want a drink,
straight away they go to the nearest water.  There is no arguing with
them, I assure you, none."

The bosun grunted.  "Not likely.  We filled the cisterns at Mau
Ngapcha, same as we always do.  Never heard of the mountain getting
thirsty before."

Razi shrugged.  "Everything has its first time." He reached for the
map, but the bosun stopped him.

"Leave it here," Uyves said.  "Anything else *does* happen, we'll want
to have another look."

He raised his voice so that it would carry to the crowd outside.
"Captain's probably already figured out what's going on.  My bet is,
Jack or one of the condors is already halfway here to tell us what's
what.  'Til we know, there's nothing we can do, so I want you all to
just go about your business.  Clean up what you can, fix anything
that's broke…"  He paused a moment.  "I'll say the *tehanu* for
Fraederiq tomorrow morning.  Anyone wants to add anything to the pyre,
talk to Gaeston before then."

At that, the crowd began to break up.  Piaerre stared at the map.  The
Brumosos curved across northern Cherne, then strode boldly down its
east coast, past Praczedt and Thind to the long peninsula of Barra
Bantang.  The blue line showing the mountain's usual course ran from
Mau Ngapcha in the southeast to Gandan Berth in the northwest.  If
Avaunt kept going northeast instead, through the Brumosos, they'd
could reach the sea in a month.

But what if it turned again?  It could take them…anywhere.  The
enormity of the thought dizzied her.  The Staircase Kingdom at the
East Pole, or Garheim in the north, or even further, to Anuvatik–they
could just keep flying forever.

The thought made her mouth go dry.  Condors and griffins, cloudherds
and the occasional wild-eyed balloonist–they could carry news and a
few light luxuries up to the mountain, but not water.  Once the great
cisterns that lay inside the mountain ran dry, they would be at the
mercy of the rain and snow.

She traced a line across the map with his finger east, past Sullair
and over the ocean.  What if Avaunt went all the way to the Worldrim
and just kept going, past where the last stream fell forever into
nothing, past the last rogue cloud blown far from its herd, and out
into the void that separated Cherne from the stars?  She shivered.
The world suddenly seemed very small.

---

Queçenne burst into tears when her mother told her what had happened
to Fraederiq.  "You'd best go up to your lessons," Laeuc told his
younger daughter, watching helplessly as his wife gathered their
oldest child into her arms and made soothing noises.

"I suppose," Erileine said.  It didn't seem right, practicing verbs
when someone she had known all her life had just died, but what else
could she do?

She trudged up Slip Street to the Captain's House, watching sidelong
to see if anyone's face changed when they caught sight of her.  "It
wasn't my fault," she wanted to say, but there was no one to say it
to.

The purple lumens in the Captain's House garden filled the air with a
wet peppery smell.  *I should trim them back,* she thought for the
third time in as many days.  She took a brick of dayglass from the
tray in the garden where she had left it the night before to soak up
the morning light and went inside.  Unlacing her boots, she slipped
her feet into the fleece slippers that waited beside the door and went
into the library.

Razi was sitting in his usual place at the narrow table that stretched
nearly the length of room.  The lantern by his elbow shone dull
orange, its stored daylight exhausted.  Behind him, an inexpert
watercolor of the Pilot ruins on Avaunt's peak hung next to a much
more competent rendering in ink of Forecastle seen in three-quarters
view.  The rest of the walls were shelves packed to bursting with–with
everything, Erileine had come to realize.

"Clear day, bookster," Erileine said, replacing the spent piece of
dayglass in the lantern with the freshly-charged one.

Razi looked up from the origami book that lay unfolded on the table in
front of him.  "*Shalma'a*.  How are you?"

Erileine shrugged, not knowing how to answer the question.  "Is that
Bantangui?" she asked.

"*La*, yes, a poem." Razi pushed it across to his apprentice.  Golden
curlicues and ruby zigzags danced around the elegant calligraphy on
the delicate mulberry-paper page.  "The shapes and colors tell you
what you should feel as you read it.  The green means sadness, and
these sapphire dots?  They are for irony.  Whatever the poem says,
*la*, you are supposed to feel its opposite."

Erileine gazed hungrily at the page, her remorse momentarily
forgotten.  Every day, it seemed, the bookster casually pulled a
miracle off the shelf.

She realized suddenly that Razi was still waiting.  "What does it
say?"

Razi grinned.  "That the writer feels woe, such woe as no one has ever
felt before, at their lover's departure.  But *la*, the more woe they
feel, the more sapphire they use." He folded the book and dropped it
into the crate he referred to as the compost heap.  If it had been
interesting, he would have had Erileine catalog it and put it back on
the shelves that lined the library's walls.  If it had been *really*
interesting, he would have spent an hour going through it, talking
aloud while Erileine made notes and asked questions.

The captains of Avaunt had been retiring to Starboard Town for two
hundred years.  In four months, Razi and Erileine had sorted one wall
of their collected books and one shelf of a second.  Four more shelves
and two more walls, and what Razi called "the easy part" would be
done.  Then they would start the research he had come to do in the
first place.  Where had each book come from?  Who had drawn each map,
signed each contract, scribbled notes in the margins of each yellowed
tax receipt?  And what light could they cast on the centuries
immediately following the fall of the Pilots?  "Everything that has
happened since has been footnotes to that time," Razi had explained
the first day Erileine started work for him.  "If we would truly
understand who we are, *la*, we must first understand those years."

He reached for a small volume bound in faded red leather and set it in
front of Erileine.  "*Unprofitable Speculations*," she haltingly read
aloud.  "By His Balance, Eimin di Cuayaçedil."

"It is better pronounced '*Quay*-ya-se-*deel*'," the bookster
corrected.  He opened the book to a spot marked by a colored thread.
"Here.  The original text is on the left, in Arañese.  The translation
is on the right.  It is perhaps a little loftier than you are used to,
but *la*, see what you can make of it."

Erileine scanned the first few lines.  "And among the–Bantangui?"
Razi nodded.  "Among the Bantangui, they believe that when people die,
they are reborn as themselves…" Her voice trailed off.

"Go on," her teacher said mildly.

Erileine blinked.  She was *not* going to start crying.  "When people
die, they are reborn as themselves, to live their lives over once
again.  This they must do, time without number, until they have lived
it–I'm sorry, I don't know that word."

"*Ipfa'ana," Razi said.  "Or *ipfakhana*, in the southern form.  It
means properly."

Erileine nodded.  "Until they have lived it properly." Erileine looked
up at her teacher.  "Is this because of Fraederiq?"

Razi turned his hands palm up, then palm down, in a Karabandi shrug.
"There is more later, in the same vein.  Eimin had reason to ask these
questions once.  I thought perhaps you would find some use in his
thoughts."

Erileine closed the book carefully.  "Thank you."

The bookster nodded.  "So," he said, his voice suddenly brisk, "Today
you will finish with those deeds, yes?  So that tomorrow we may move
on to things more interesting?"

"Yes, bookster." Erileine opened the ledger she had been indexing for
the past week, drew a lamp closer, and set to work.

The room was silent for the next three hours except for the scratching
of Erileine's pen, the leaf-fall whisper of pages being turned, and
the occasional rumble from Erileine's stomach.  When these grew
continuous, the bookster said, "*La,* enough, go and eat.  I will
greet you tomorrow."

*"Shalma'a,*" Erileine replied , somewhat self-consciously, raising
his palms to his teacher in the Karabandi style.

"*Shalma'a,*" the bookster replied before bending his head over the
old diary he had spent the greater part of the afternoon deciphering.

Erileine traded her slippers for her boots and let herself out
quietly.  The horizon had already eaten half the sun; the fat orange
blob that remained looked like a ball of yarn someone had sat on.  A
herd of clouds was passing in the distance, their bellies purple-gray
with unshed rain.  If she had been at her grandfather's, Erileine
would have looked for their shadows on the ground below.

The air smelled of pine logs burning in kitchen stoves, and of squash
and beans.  All of a sudden she remembered playing tag in the trees
when she was little: herself, Queçenne, Niquolas and his slow-wittd
brother Matthieu, Fraederiq, Uego who had moved to Portside when his
mother remarried… She couldn't have been more than seven or eight.
The mountain must have been near the equator, because darkness had
fallen as suddenly as a lid being put on a pot.  They had talked a
little too loudly in the dark on their way back to town until
Fraederiq said, "I can smell dinner." Laughing, they had raced the
rest of the way.

She wiped her eyes on her sleeve and set off for home.

---

Three generations sat at the varnished pine table that Laeuc had made
his wife as a wedding present eighteen years before.  Steam rose
lazily from the scrambled eggs, onions, and tiny cubes of squash in
the heavy clay pot in the middle of the table.  It was Queçenne and
Erileine's favorite meal, but both of them picked at it as if it were
cauliflower.  Queçenne's eyes were still red.  When Erileine
whispered, "I'm sorry," she nodded without looking up.

The adults were as quiet as the children as they mopped up eggs with
hunks of crumbly potato bread.  There had been no word from the
captain.  In its absence, speculation had swirled about all afternoon,
leaving the whole town exhausted in its wake.

Laeuc was doubly tired after sitting with Gaeston for an hour.
Fraederiq's father hadn't said much besides, "Thanks," when Laeuc
poured him his first glass of Bantangui rum, and, "Leave the bottle,
will you?" when Laeuc rose to go.

"Well," Saedanne finally said, pushing her plate away.  "So what does
*sra* bookster think of all this?"

Erileine shrugged.  "He doesn't know.  He said if anything like this
had ever happened before, everybody would probably already know about
it."

"He's probably right," she said briskly.  She pushed the stew crock
toward Erileine.  "Take that up for the bookster.  Queçenne, why don't
you tidy up?"

Having to scrape egg off her mother's precious cast-iron pan would
normally have sent Queçenne into a blue sulk.  That evening, she just
nodded and took it out the kitchen door.  A moment later, the foursome
inside the house heard it clang against the water cistern.  A moment
later, they heard Queçenne's quiet sobs.

"I'll see to her," Saedanne said, rising.  "Erileine, make sure you
wear your coat."

"I'm only going up the street," she protested.

"Do as your maere says," Laeuc sighed.  Vurt grunted, his elbow on the
table and his chin on his fist.

Warm yellow light was still dribbling out between the slats of the
shutters on the library window when she reached the Captain's House.
She paused.  Had she heard a voice?  Curious, she stepped closer to
the window.

The shutters were slightly ajar.  Through them, she heard Razi
speaking in Karabandi, all esses and vees and doubled vowels.  He
paused, then spoke again.

Erileine frowned.  Who was he talking to?  She stood on tiptoes, but
the shutters' slats were angled upward too sharply for him to see
through.  Razi spoke again.  "*Iye*," he said, "No."

Frustrated, she went around the corner and untied the leather cord
that held the door closed.  She pushed it open gently.  "Hello?" she
said uncertainly.  "Bookster?  I've brought you some dinner."

No one answered.  Erileine rapped her knuckles against the door frame.
"Hello?"

"*Ayah*." A chair scraped back.  Razi's sandals slapped on the
pine-planked floor.  A moment later, the bookster opened it and
blinked at her.

"*La*, Erileine… Come in, come in." He turned and walked unsteadily
back to the table in the center of the room.  An earthy smell like
incense hung in the air.  Erileine was shocked to see drops of sweat
on the bookster's shaven head.  Everything she had ever read about
strange southern vices came rushing back to him.

"Um, my maere thought you might want some dinner."

Razi nodded jerkily.  "So kind… I was just meditating.  Thinking,
*la*, so much to think about today."  A thick candle stood on a square
brass plate in the middle of the table.  Razi licked his thumb and
finger and pinched the faint wisp of smoke coiling up from its wick.
"*La*, that *does* smell good.  Please, to sit, to sit.  We'll talk
while I eat."

He attacked the tepid stew as if he hadn't eaten in a week.  "Here,"
he said through a mouthful of food, pulling an old book with a faded
blue leather cover off the top of the pile on the table.  "I found
this in the back.  Have you seen it?"

Erileine shook his head.  "What is it?"

Razi opened it and pushed it to her.  "*La*, you tell me."

Erileine studied it.  The pages were printed rather than
hand-lettered, so the book was less than a hundred and fifty years
old.  The language was Gandan-o, but there was no royal stamp on the
title page, so it had escaped the censor's inspection.

She sounded the words out carefully.  "The tunnels beneath Gandan and
Trunggar are so–I don't know that word."

"Similar.  Go on."

"Similar as to–I'm sorry, bookster, I don't know the next word
either."

Razi wiped the last of the stew from the pot with his finger, licked
it off, and dried his hand briskly on his sleeve.  "*La*, no matter,
you did well." He tapped the page.  "The author measured the tunnels
below Gandan Berth and those underneath the royal palace in Trunggar.
They have the same height and width, the same distance between
turnings.  From this, she argues the latter were also made as a berth
for the mountain."

Erileine frowned.  "So you think we're headed to Trunggar?"

Razi shook his head.  "That is not the direction in which the mountain
moves.  But *la*, perhaps tomorrow we can search for other
descriptions of tunnels to see where else we might be going."

He stretched and yawned.  "Enough of books.  Would you choose to walk
down to my lodgings with me so that I do not lose myself?"

Erileine thought that Razi was about as likely to get lost as he was
to grow wings and fly, but she was happy to have company.  As they
walked down Slip Street, the bookster had her say words aloud in
Gandan-o, reminding him every dozen steps to roll her r's and soften
her n's.

They stopped when they reached Mamaere Mayeule's.  "Please thank your
parents for dinner," Razi said.  "I shall see you tomorrow?"

"Yes, bookster.  Good night."

"Good night." Light and noise spilled out onto the street as he opened
the door, along with a few respectful greetings.  The room inside was
packed as tightly as a shearing pen in spring.  Voices swirled around,
each interrupting the one before, and were muffled again as the sturdy
door closed.  Erileine looked up.  Diwei, the Western Star, should
have been almost directly above the chimney of the Captain's House.
Instead, it glittered a double handspan to the left.  Wishing there
was still stew in the pot she was carrying to keep her hands warm, she
hurried toward home.

---

Yellowsday, Peridot 13^th^, dawned clear and cold.  Most days did on
Avaunt.  Except during storms, the only clouds that flew higher than
the mountain were old gray bulls spread so thin that they could hardly
be seen.

But there were no cloud bulls in the sky that morning, no stately
white heifers pillowed on top of one another, no streaky calves barely
able to hold themselves together.  There was just the sky paling to
gray as the sun rose in the wrong place.

Erileine lay in bed and watched her curtain slowly brighten.  It had
taken her hours to fall asleep.  If she had just put out her hand…
Fraederiq's weight might have pulled her off the mountain, but maybe
that would have been better.  Maybe then she'd be able to close her
eyes without starting to cry again.

She twitched at the sound of a lammergeier calling somewhere high
above, threw back her quilt, and stood up.  She wasn't getting back to
sleep, so she might as well make tea for her parents and sister.

As the sun rose, the people of Starboard Town gathered at a walled
garden on the hill behind the Captain's House.  It was a quiet, tidy
place, overlooked by the blue maples and braided pines that the
townspeople planted on their children's naming days.  People took
pride in being able to point to their grandfather's grandmother's
tree.  "Still straight and tall," they would say, not knowing that the
beams in Starboard Town's first houses had been made from the naming
day trees of the Hett who had lived there before them.

Everyone wore their best clothes, but came barefoot.  No one knew
why–it was just how things were done.  Women brought babies on their
hips, while the town's oldest man, Papaere Badette, was carried up the
hill in a wicker chair.  Wrapped in a long black coat whose wide
sleeves had gone out of style thirty years before, he looked like a
strange, solemn bird.

The bosun had worked since midnight to build a pyre of pine logs on
the heavy gray stone at the center of the garden.  He stood beside it
in the blue coat and trousers of his office, his square black hat
tucked under his arm, and nodded to people as they took their places
at the wall.  No one spoke except the smallest children, who were
immediately hushed.

Gaeston was the last to arrive.  In his hands he held a stuffed toy
goat, a tiny pair of sandals whose soles had been worn thin by
countless adventures in the village's gardens, and the embroidered
shirt that Fraederiq had worn on his sixteenth naming day a few months
before.  Erileine's heart twisted at the sight of it.  He remembered
Fraederiq standing as straight as a piece of bamboo while he swore to
observe Avaunt's laws and obey the captain and his appointed officers
in peril of his soul's rest.  He had stumbled a little over the oath,
but had nearly split his cheeks smiling when the bosun clapped him on
the shoulder and ordered him to turn out for militia practice with the
other men.

Gaeston set Fraederiq's things on the pitch-smeared logs.  Moving as
stiffly as a marionette, he took a blue silk hair ribbon from his
pocket.  As he laid it on the pyre, Erileine heard Laeuc whisper, "But
that's–!"

"Sh!" Saedanne elbowed her husband to quiet him, but her eyes were
with Erileine's on Queçenne, whose renewed sobbing told the whole town
who the hair ribbon had belonged to.

Gaeston stepped back and saluted the bosun.  Uyves returned the salute
gravely.  Hungry and cold, a baby began to cry.  "What?  What?"
Papaere Badette asked.  His granddaughter shushed him gently.

Gaeston took the smoldering torch the bosun handed him and touched it
to the logs.  The crowd held its breath.  The flame hesitated a
moment, then began to spread.  Everyone exhaled with relief, except
the hungry baby, who was still crying.  The flame had caught.
Fraederiq was at rest.

As dark smoke wrote its message of loss and grief on the sky, the
bosun cleared his throat.  "When I die, I shall give back to the world
all that I did not do.  All that I might have been and wasn't, all the
things I lost and spent and wasted, I shall give them back to the
lives that haven't been lived yet.  That will be my thanks to those I
loved, and to the world that gave me the life."

Around him, the people of Starboard Town bowed their heads and
murmured, "That will be my gift." In twos and threes and families,
they turned toward home, leaving Gaeston to tend his son's last fire.

Laeuc put his hand on Erileine's shoulder and squeezed.  "Come on."

Erileine shook her head.  "I want to stay."

Her father shook her gently.  "This isn't for you, love.  It's for
Gaeston."

Erileine wiped her eyes on her sleeve.  "I know," she said wretchedly,
his throat aching from the effort of not sobbing.  "I'm sorry.  I
should have– I–"

"Sh." Her father gently shook her again, dry-eyed, but as miserable as
his daughter.  "It wasn't your fault.  You can come back later and
help clean up the ashes if you want.  All right?" Gently but firmly,
Laeuc turned her toward home.

Most people spent that morning repairing the minor damage the
mountain's shudders had caused.  They talked about Fraederiq–what a
shame, so young, what would Gaeston do now, it would be terrible if he
started drinking again–but conversation quickly turned to the
mountain.  Where do *you* think we're going?  And shouldn't we do
something, just in case?  Well no, I don't know what, but surely
there's something.  Yes, I'm sure the captain's thought of all of
this, but…

Erileine finally fled, unable to listen any more.

She was sitting at the top of the stairs that led down to her
grandfather's cottage, watching the unfamiliar peaks and hating
herself, when Niquolas said, "Hoy," behind her hesitantly.  Erileine
grunted without lifting her chin off his knees.

"Whatcha doing?" Niquolas asked.

"Thinking."

"Oh." There was a pause while Niquolas digested that.  "What about?"

Erileine shrugged, then sighed just loud enough to be heard when
Niquolas sat down beside her.

"You ever wonder what it's like down there?" he asked.  When Erileine
didn't answer, Niquolas continued, "All those cities we never see–I
bet they don't all look after goats 'n' pull up weeds."

"Bet they do." Erileine wiped her nose on the knee of her trousers.
"Someone has to."

"Doesn't mean it has to be us.  Me and Fraedi… Here, look." He pulled
something dark and hairy out of his shoulder bag and held it out.

Erileine looked at it sidelong.  A little larger than her two fists
put together, covered in coarse, dark fibers, with scraped-out
diamond-shaped eyes and a ragged grin full of carved fangs…  "What the
cake is that?"

"It's a head," Niquolas said proudly.  "For a door soldier.  C'mon,
you remember–I was going to trade some of 'em to the Hett for that
thing Fraedi wanted."

"Oh.  Right."

"We got the coconuts out of the trash after Departure Eve, and we've
been carving them all different ways.  Well, mostly I've been carving,
but a lot of the ideas were Fraedi's.  He figured we could get half a
ring each for them in Gandan, on account of them being novelty items.
Maybe more, if we had time to make some helmets for them or
something."

"Mm." Erileine turned back to the mountains.

After a moment's hesitation, Niquolas put the coconut head back in his
bag.  "Now that he's… Well, I was wondering if…"

Erileine stood up abruptly.  "I have to get up to the library," she
said.  "The bookster will be expecting me."

Niquolas scrambled to his feet.  "Right." He raised a hand in a
half-wave to Erileine's back.  "Suppose that's more important."

As Erileine reached the first bend in the path, she glanced back.
Niquolas was still standing at the top of the stairs, staring at the
peaks below.  Suddenly remorseful, Erileine opened her mouth to call
out to him, but just as she did, Niquolas threw the carved coconut off
the mountain.

Just after noon, when most people were sitting down to soup and fried
squash, a blue and yellow parrot settled on the sill of Bosun Uyves'
front window.  He cocked his head one way, then the other.  Satisfied
that none of the town's cats were anywhere nearby, he rapped his beak
sharply against the window's shutter.  "Uyves!" he squawked.  "Uyves,
open up!"

Inside, a feminine voice whispered a panicky question.  A deeper voice
answered.  There was the sound of clothes hastily being donned, then a
creak as a rear door opened and closed.  A moment later, the shutter
flew open.

"Clear day, Jack," the bosun said brightly, buttoning his shirt.

"Clear day," the parrot replied.  He imitated a cough.  "Sorry for
interrupting."

"Ah, not to worry." The bosun leaned on the sill.  "Just consoling
those as need it."

"Of course," the parrot said dryly.

Uyves watched the kites flying overhead for a moment.  "You sharing
your nest with anyone these days, Jack?"

The parrot bobbed his head.  "Aye.  She came on board at Mau Ngapcha."

"Oh?  Well, good for you.  Mind me asking what her name is?"

"Doesn't have one.  She's not Gifted."

"No?"

"Nope." Jack's version of shaking his head was two quick twitches left
and right.  "It ain't as common as stories would have you believe."

"Mm.  Well, then it's a good thing you lot don't mind having ungifted
mates."

Jack scratched the side of his head with a claw.  "Aye.  And I suppose
it's a good thing for you that so many women on Avaunt feel the same
way."

The bosun's laugh nearly filled the street.

Ten minutes later, he stood at the top of Slip Street, his hat firmly
on his head.  "Gather all, gather all!" he bellowed, pounding the
town's assembly drum in time with his words.  "Gather all and
hearken!"

The townspeople assembled quickly.  A few said hellos to the parrot,
who bobbed his head at them in return from his perch on the Captain's
House gate.

"Morning, Jack." Mamaere Mayeule held out her hand.  "Dried plum?"

"Don't mind if I do," the parrot said, deftly beaking it off her palm.

"Right, quiet down," the bosun said to the crowd.  "Jack here has word
from the captain.  Jack?"

"Thank you, bosun." The parrot spread its wings and settled them
again.  "Well.  You all know what happened yesterday.  That means you
know as much as anyone does.  The captain had no warning, and doesn't
know where we're headed.  We could be back on course tomorrow, or
not."

He raised his voice over the crowd's murmurs.  "The immediate problem
is water.  There's enough in the tanks to get us through to Carnelian,
or even to Chalcedony, but only if we're careful about how much we
use.  So, orders are," his voice changed to imitate the captain's, "No
water for vanity gardens, or for boiling dyes or dagging wool."

The crowd's murmurs grew louder.  "I know, I know," Jack said in his
own voice.  "But until we have a better idea of what's happening,
those are his orders."

"Do you want us to stop bathing, too?" a voice called out.

The bosun spoke up quickly.  "What difference would that make to you,
Donaien?"

A few people laughed.  Donaien crossed his arms and scowled.  Beside
him, his husband Armaend asked, "What about evacuation?"

The crowd stilled.  "What about it?" Jack asked.

"You said we'd be all right until Chalcedony, but what if we haven't
berthed somewhere by then?  Even if we stop watering the fields, we'll
be dry by Tourmaline.  What happens then?"

Jack fixed his beady stare on Armaend.  "Nobody is going to evacuate
anything," the parrot said.  His rasping voice carried clearly on the
gentle midday breeze.  "I've lived on this mountain eighty-three
years, chick and bird.  It's always found berth, and until we see
otherwise, I'm going to trust it to find berth again."

"Easy for you to say," someone muttered behind Erileine.  "You can
always just fly away."

Jack scratched the side of his head briskly with a claw.  "So, unless
there are questions?  Right.  Bosun?"

Bosun Uyves' chest swelled as he took a deep breath.  "Dis…missed!"

As the crowd began to break up, the parrot squawked, "Bookster?  A
word?"  The Karabandi had been standing next to Erileine and her
family, a thoughtful expression on his face.

"Of course," Razi said.  "Erileine?"

"*Sra*?"

Razi raised his eyebrows.  "You *are* my apprentice, aren't you?"

Erileine glanced at her parents.  "Go ahead," Laeuc said.  Erileine
hurried after her teacher and the bosun into the Captain's House.

They gathered around a small map that Razi had found in a book on the
medicinal properties of fungi.  "Not much room for us to get through,
is there?" the bosun said, tapping the inverted V's that marked the
Brumosos.

The bookster shrugged.  "*La*, there are gaps and passes–perhaps we
will go through one of those.  *Sra* parrot, does the captain perhaps
have more detailed maps in Forecastle?"

"Don't know, but I'll ask.  And just call me Jack, bookster.  Never
been much of one for titles."

Razi inclined his head.  "Jack, then.  And if I might ask another
question?  The captain's wife–did she feel anything yesterday?"

The parrot shook his head.  "Not that anyone's told me.  But as far as
I know, her magic's about healing, so…"  He ruffled his wings in a
birdy shrug.

Razi closed the book and set it aside.  "Well, please convey my
greetings to the captain, then.  I hope you have an uneventful
flight."

The bosun left with Jack on his shoulder.  Erileine closed the door
behind them.  "What do you think will happen if there isn't a pass big
enough?"  she asked.

Razi waggled his hands absent-mindedly.  "*La*, who can know?  The
mountain flies higher over Darp than it does at Mau Ngapcha or Gandan
Berth.  Perhaps it will fly higher still when we reach the Brumosos.
Or perhaps crashing is the wrong way to think of it.  Perhaps the
mountain is in season to mate."

He grinned boyishly at the look on Erileine's face.  "Oh, come, I
cannot be the only one to think of that?  Perhaps the mountain is like
a goat in spring.  Stranger things have happened."

"Not around here," Erileine muttered, embarrassed.

Razi's grin softened.  "*La*, well, just in case we survive, I think
you should keep working on your Praczny.  I know it is not used so
much on the mountain as Gandan-o or Bantangui, but the exercise will
do you good.  Here–see if you can find the word for 'pass'."

"Yes, *sra*." Erileine took the tattered blue-and-yellow Praczny
dictionary from its place on the shelf by the window, pulled the
dayglass lantern closer, and settled into her chair.

"Mountain," she said.  "A mass of rock that–um, hang on."  She flipped
the pages again, pursed her lips, and flipped back.  "A mass of rock
that rises above its surroundings, and is bigger than a hill."  She
glanced at the bookster.  "So that's no help."

Razi nodded.  "How about 'travel'?  Or 'road'?  *La*, one of those
might lead you to something that leads to 'pass'."

Piaerre looked at him in dismay.  "But that could take forever!"

"Yes, it could." Razi slid another book back into its place on the
shelf.  "But sometimes that's just what you have to do."

Erileine chased words all afternoon while Razi reshelved books.  Every
once in a while he set a volume on the table instead to shape a rough
map of Cherne: those from Ruuda at the north end, those from Ini
Bantang and Barra Bantang at the south, the Ninety-Nine Kingdoms in
the west, and a scant handful from Praczedt and Thind to the east.  A
lone volume of Karabandi poetry occupied the center.

The dozenth time Erileine looked up, two glinting pieces of brass
caught her eyes.  "What are those for?"

"*La*, I thought to add some landmarks to my map.  That one is for
Ossisswe.  The other is Coriandel.  You see?" Razi handed them to
Erileine.  The first was square, with a lantern stamped on one side
and the date "1241" on the other.  The second was round, with a hole
punched through it.  A hatched pattern framed the hole on both sides,
put there, Erileine had learned, to deter trimmers from taking metal
off the coin's edges.

"Wait." Erileine replaced the coins, then fished a smooth gray pebble
out of her pocket that she had put there several days ago for some
now-forgotten reason.  "Avaunt," she said, setting it down a double
handspan from the coins.  It seemed very small.

They worked through the last of the afternoon, pausing only to answer
the call of nature.  For a time, someone chopped firewood outside, and
someone else trundled a cart past the Captain's House, but the only
sounds in the library were those of pages being turned, and chairs
creaking as their occupants shifted their weight.

A knock on the door made them both start.  "Hello?" Laeuc called as he
entered.  "Anyone aboard?"  He tousled his daughter's and looked
around.  "Saints, but there's a lot of books here, isn't there?"

"Well, it *is* a library," Erileine said.

"Ah.  Right." One corner of Laeuc's mouth twitched.  "Anyway, I just
came to say, a flock of us got to talking, and we've decided to head
up to Forecastle tomorrow to pick up a few things, just in case.  I
was wondering if you would like to come along."

Razi pursed his lips, then nodded.  "Certainly.  I could use some more
ink and paper, and *la,* some fresh air would do my apprentice some
good."

"I'm sure it would," Laeuc agreed.  "We're wanting an early start–on
the road at dawn?"

"Of course," Razi agreed.  He rolled his head to work the kinks out of
his neck.  "I shall see you then."

Walking home beside her father, Erileine suddenly asked, "What did you
mean, just in case?"

"Hm?"

"Back in the library.  You said people were going up to Forecastle
just in case."

"Oh, that." Her father shrugged.  "I don't know.  People got to
talking about Vaszlav's last visit, and how they'd all wanted
something he didn't have, and, well, it just seemed like a good idea
to get to the market and pick up a few things."

"Oh.  Are maere and Queçenne coming too?"

Laeuc shook his head.  "I don't think Queçenne feels up to it right
now."

They walked the rest of the way home in silence.  As they rounded the
big bend in Slip Street, Erileine caught sight of Niquolas emptying a
compost bucket in his family's back yard.  She raised a hand to wave,
but Niquolas turned away and pretended not to see her.

After dinner was over and she had scraped the dishes clean, Erileine
went up to her room and slid under his quilt.  She lay there for a
moment looking–really looking–at her room for the first time she could
remember.  The wood-and-leather toys on the shelf by the window seemed
to have shrunk.  Maybe her mother was right: maybe it was time to pass
them on to someone else.

She tossed and turned for hours.  When sleep finally came, it brought
a new nightmare.  This time, Fraederiq and Niquolas were dangling her
out the upstairs back window at Mamaere Mayeule's.  One boy held each
of her legs; each time she tried to grab the window sill, they relaxed
their grip for a moment, making her whimper with terror.  It had
actually happened, a year or so ago.  Niquolas had eventually said he
was tired of the game, and insisted that they pull her in.  In her
dream, though, Erileine was hanging over the edge of the mountain.

She woke with a small cry.  Dizzy with sweat, she fixed her eyes on
her dayglass night light and waited for dawn.

---

Greensday, Peridot 14^th^.  Starboard Town woke to discover that the
mountain had sped up during the night.  The steady half-gallop-an-hour
breeze of its passage had had become a steady wind that blew people's
hair back, rattled doors, and made chickens restless in their coops.
Branches rustled against each other nervously, while overhead, the
town's kites jerked on their strings as if trying to escape.

For the people gathering in front of Mamaere Mayeule's, the mountain
speeding up somehow felt worse than it changing direction.  The steady
whisper of the wind flying past it had been part of their lives from
the day they were born.  Now it seemed to be saying, "Trouble is on
his way."

"It ain't right," Donaien said to Armaend, staring out their kitchen
window, the morning's chai cooling in a pot on the table between them.

Armaend shook his head.  "Ain't right at all." He stirred some honey
into his mug and drained it in one noisy gulp.  "Come on.  Time to
go."

Erileine and her father were almost the last ones to arrive.  Saedanne
had spotted a stain on Laeuc's shirt too faint to be seen by male eyes
and insisted that he change.  And while your father's doing that,
Erileine, can't you please comb your hair?  Yes, I know you're going
to be wearing a hat all day, what has that got to do with it?
Honestly…

"There's Razi," Erileine said.  "Can we walk with him?"

"Sure." Laeuc nodded hellos to his friends, some as fresh as he was,
others, like the bosun, bleary-eyed and grumpy.

Forecastle was only four gallops for Jack the parrot, but the narrow
track that connected it to Starboard Town was as twisted as an
arthritic snake.  It would take the Starboard Towners most of the day
to get to Forecastle; they would have only a couple of hours in the
market before the sun set, then another hour or two the next day
before starting the return journey.

"Right," the bosun said loudly.  "Those coming, let's be off.  The
rest of you, don't get into any trouble while I'm not here to enjoy
it."  He waved his arm as if sweeping a herd of goats into a pen.

It seemed to Erileine as though everyone who wasn't actually going was
up to see the travellers leave.  Seized by sudden misgivings, a few
people pulled on boots and coats, kissed their husbands or wives
goodbye, and joined the flock trailing after the bosun.

Standing in his doorway, Gaeston watched them go by impassively.
Laeuc waved and said good morning, but Gaeston made no reply.  From
the look of his hair and clothes, he hadn't washed since his son's
funeral; the dark green bottle in his hand could have been half full
or half empty.  He watched the little parade go by, then went back
inside to his lonely anger.

The bosun counted them off as they walked past him at the top of Slip
Street.  "Twenty five, twenty six, twenty seven…  Twenty seven."  He
turned to Vurt, who was standing beside with a hot mug of tea in his
hand.

"I'll keep an eye on everything while you're gone," the old man said.

"Thanks."  The bosun hesitated.  "And one more thing.  That ladder of
yours.  Think you could put back together, just in case?"

Vurt's face went carefully blank.  "Didn't know you knew about that."

The bosun smiled.  "Whole town knows about it."  Vurt's "ladder" was a
chain of climbing anchors, cleverly concealed loops of rope, and
sturdy bamboo rungs that ran from his verandah down to the base of the
mountain.  A goat couldn't have climbed it, but a man could–even a
one-legged man, if he was patient and careful, and as a matter of
principle didn't want to pay the captain's duty on a pack full of
Bantangui spices.  Each time the mountain berthed, Vurt reassembled
the top fifty strides of his private connection to the world below and
visited like-minded businessmen on the ground below.

Vurt nodded.  "I can do that."  The bosun clapped him on the shoulder
and hurried to catch up with his travelling companions.  Vurt stared
into his tea.  Every time the mountain berthed, he told himself that
he had built his ladder so that he could set a little aside for his
grandchildren.  Only on the darkest nights, when he missed his
long-gone wife the most, did he admit to himself that it was because
he'd never really believed a mountain could fly.

A hundred strides past the last beanfield, conversation died as
Forecastle Road climbed a dark shoulder of granite to the town's upper
goat pasture.  A pair of red-billed steelbirds kept pace with them for
a time, clacking their beaks to warn the Avauntois away from their
nest.  Boot soles clomped on stone while the wind slipped cold fingers
down the travellers' collars, toying with their scarves and rustling
the branches around them.

Erileine was sweating by the time they reached the pasture.  Pine
branches woven through sturdy uprights closed off two of its sides.
Goats bleated behind the prickly wall, their brown and white coats
half-visible through the barrier.  The cliff that formed the pasture's
third side was too steep even for them to climb, although a creeping
vine from the jungle below Mau Ngapcha had made a nest just out of
reach of their hungry mouths.  Erileine paused a moment to watch it
wave its sweetly-scented flowers at a rabbit.  Come closer, come
closer, they seemed to beckon.  Come to me… The rabbit scampered away.

The road narrowed beyond the pasture, forcing the townspeople to walk
single file.  It cut back and forth like Slip Street as it climbed.
"Need to fix that," the bosun grunted, shaking a wobbly pine railing
with his hand.  Laeuc just nodded.  Despite his protests, Saedanne had
insisted that he carry waterproofs for himself and Erileine, and he
was puffing under their weight.  He'd walked to Forecastle and back in
a single day once to get his wife a naming day present.  He didn't
remember it being so hard then…

They stopped to rest when the road leveled off.  Erileine turned and
looked back the way they had come.  All he could see of Starboard Town
was the roof of the Captain's House and a few household kites.  In the
distance, a herd of clouds was raining on the plains below.  *At least
_they_ have water*, Erileine thought.

"Do you think they know?" he asked no one in particular.  "Down below,
I mean.  That we're off course?"

"They know," the bosun said firmly.  "Can't move a mountain around
without people noticing."

Razi nodded.  Despite the die-hard patches of snow lurking among the
rocks, his feet were bare in his thick-soled desert sandals, though he
had tied the wrist strings of his *deel*, and belted it more tightly
around his waist to keep the warmth in.  "*La*, it will be like the
tale of the camel in the crib.  There will be meetings–kings and
princes, ministers and magicians, all twittering at each other like
birds.  What does it mean, who will advantage by it…  Heh." He
sniggered like a little boy who has heard a dirty joke.

"Glad you find it funny," Donaien said a little sourly.  "Can't say I
see the joke myself."

Razi spread his hands.  "I am sorry to give offense.  But I spent some
time as a clerk below the court at Armaq when I was younger, and oh,
they are all so serious.  Even when there is nothing they can do, they
must write each other letters." He laughed suddenly.  "*La*, perhaps
*especially* when there is nothing they can do.  Like the King of
Nyengmo and the three pigs.  Do you know the story?"  Donaien shook
his head.  "No?  Well, if I may as we walk?"

Donaien shouldered his pack and waved Razi on.  "After you."

Razi dipped his head.  "Thank you.  Now, many of my stories are not
true, but this is a true story.  The king in question, Phuntsok, was a
very fat man…"

A hundred strides later Erileine's ears were burning.  She was glad
her mother wasn't there, although the women within earshot were
laughing as hard as the men.  When Razi started imitating voices–the
squeaky Minister of Law, saying that the pigs would have to marry, and
the stuttering Minister of Rumors, saying that her desk had never been
so clean–the bosun had to lean against trees and hold his sides.

"So you see," Razi finished, ducking a low-hanging branch, "You are
very lucky, here on your mountain.  You have a captain, *la*, who is
wise enough to know that if he cannot steer his ship, he should not
pretend to, and a bosun in each town to make sure children spend their
days pulling up weeds instead of getting into trouble–"

"Or both," the bosun said, still chuckling.

"*La*, or both," Razi agreed.  "But please, I have burdened you with a
story–perhaps I could carry one of yours in return?"

"Do you know how Papaere Vurt lost his foot?" Erileine asked before
anyone else could speak.  When Razi shook his head, Erileine pointed
up the mountain's side.  "It was up there, in one of the old tunnels.
Bosun Uyves' father was there–he was a bosun's mate, wasn't he?"

"That he was," Uyves said, wiping the damp off his moustache.  "It
was, what, forty years ago?  Forty-one, now…"

*The bonescuttle whose skull would eventually hang above Vurt's
fireplace was what brought him to Avaunt.  They were patient
creatures, slow-moving until prey was in reach, then as fast as a
striking snake.  No one knew how this one had found its way onto the
mountain–an egg lying unnoticed in a sack of chocolate beans, perhaps,
or some angry Bantangui merchant trying to sabotage a rival.  It just
appeared one day, fully grown and very hungry.*

*It took goats at first, dragging them back to its lair to dismember.
Then it took a Hett boy, the son of tinkers who had made camp outside
Forecastle.  A few people said, "Better them than our goats," and more
thought it without saying it, but they all knew that the bonescuttle
wouldn't care whether the next child was Hett or not.*

*So Forecastle bosun and several of his mates went hunting.  Tracking
the bonescuttle was easy, but when the trail led to the mouth of an
old tunnel, he and his men stopped.  Like all Avauntois, they had
spent their lives under an open sky, with the whole world spread out
below them.  They stored trade goods in the shallowest tunnels, but
the thought of going into their depth… Of having such a weight of
stone over their heads… No.  Unable to meet one another's eyes, they
turned back.  This wasn't a job for an Avauntois.*

*Vurt was twenty-four then.  His parents had been taken the year
before when scribbling fever swept across the Karaband.  They had left
him a small house and a rat catching business whose clients were as
poor as themselves.*

*Unable to bear the house's emptiness, Vurt sold it for half what it
had been worth a year before–it was a poor market, when so many stood
empty.  He was on his way to Tomb Hill to look for work as a caravan
guard when he saw a palace clerk painting a notice on the wall in Six
Ears Square.  The Captain of Avaunt…  a bonescuttle…  passage there
and back to be provided by the emir to any qualified applicant…  He
looked up at the blue sky over his head, and thought, why not?  He'd
killed one of the things before.*

*The next morning, he found himself on the back of a small cloud,
sweating in the heavy coat and fleece-lined trousers that the
cloudherd swore he would need once they got higher.  He cried out in
wonder and fear when the cloud rose into the air.  He had played on
Coriandel's rooftops, and climbed trees, but this–this was how the sun
and the moon saw the world.*

* "First time?" the cloudherd asked.*

*"Yup."*

*"Well, if you're going to sick up, do it over the side.  Squabbles
here hates being puked on."*

*The mountain swelled as they approached it.  Its irregular peak was
stone gray and ice bright; its lower reaches were dense with
vegetation.  And there, directly ahead, a town clung to its side like
a burr to a camel.*

*The cloudherd set him down in a goat pasture.  Bunched together at
the fence in the hope that he might have carrot greens for them, the
goats watched as he shouldered his bags and went looking for someone
who could tell him what he was supposed to do as the cloud lifted off
once again.*

*The first villager Vurt met didn't speak Karabandi.  Neither did the
second, or the third.  It wasn't until he pulled a steel trap out of
his bag and waved it in their faces that the Avauntois realized their
savior had arrived.*

*It didn't take Vurt long to realize how much the Avauntois disliked
the tunnels.  Truth be told, he didn't like them either.  They
reminded him of the night he had spent beneath Coriandel, hunting his
first bonescuttle.  The way their floors and walls and ceilings were
tilted made it worse: at some point in the distant past, the mountain
had tipped back so that floor were angled ramps and stairs were
saw-edged traps.*

*Vurt was setting the last of his traps when word came that the
bonescuttle had taken another goat.  Grim-faced, Starboard Town's
bosun led Vurt to the scene.  The creature had cut through the thorny
wall around the pasture.  A drying pool of blood showed where it had
caught hold of its prey.  More blood speckled a shallow furrow that
led to half of the goat's remains.*

*Vurt put his hand on the still-warm carcass and looked helplessly at
the woods around them.  He had spent his whole life in the desert–he
didn't know how to track something among trees.  "What way go?"  he
asked the bosun in bad Gandan-o.*

*The bosun pointed.  Vurt stood and wiped his hand on his trousers.
"I follow."*

*The trail led to a tunnel mouth.  The bushes growing around it seemed
undisturbed, but scratches on the stones showed where the creature had
sharpened its pincers.*

*Vurt unslung his crossbow.  Its quarrels were tipped with steel barbs
that hooked cruelly backward.  His father had bought them years before
but never used them.  He ran a quick loop of spider silk through the
eyelet at the quarrel's base, knotted it, and handed the coil to the
bosun.  "Good?" Vurt asked.*

*The bosun shook his head.  "No.  Let's go."*

*Twenty strides in, Vurt raised his hand to signal stop.  Up ahead, he
heard the sound of pincers stripping flesh from a goat's leg to make
morsels small enough for a tiny mouth.*

*Vurt tapped the bosun on the shoulder.  "I loud, you pull, yes?" he
whispered, twitching the silk line trailing from his quarrel to
illustrate.*

*The bosun raised his fist to his ear and nodded.  Hoping that meant,
"I understand," Vurt edged forward gingerly, one foot on the tilted
floor, the other on the steeply-angled wall beside it.*

*The sound ahead of him suddenly stopped.  Vurt raised his crossbow to
his shoulder and thumbed open the shutter on his little dayglass
lantern.*

*The bonescuttle froze in the sudden light, blinking its too-human
eyes.  Its scorpion tail twitched above its back, and then it
charged.*

*Vurt fired.  The quarrel hit the bonescuttle with a crack.  "Pull!"
Vurt yelled.  "Pull pull pull!" He swung his crossbow at the
bonescuttle's head like an ax as the bonescuttle caught his left leg
with its pincer.*

*Vurt screamed and fell backward as the bosun and his men dragged the
bonescuttle on top of him.  He covered his head with his arms as its
fleshless legs stabbed the stone on either side of him, then drove his
knife up between the plates on the creature's belly.  Screaming in
terror and fury, he pulled his knife free and stabbed it again and
again.*

*The next thing he knew, the bosun was dragging him out of the tunnel.
"Is it?  Is it?" Vurt gasped, not knowing the Gandan-o for "dead".*

*One of the men held up the bonescuttle's severed head.  Vurt nodded
and fainted.*

*The emir's doctress in Coriandel could have saved his nearly-severed
leg.  The Avauntois in Starboard Town couldn't.  Vurt lay in bed
shaking with fever for a week.  When he woke, a woman was sitting on a
stool beside his cot, grinding herbs with a pestle and mortar.  She
soaked the bandages on his stump in warm water to loosen them, then
unwrapped them slowly and carefully so that she could pack more herbs
onto the bloody ruin below his knee.  He said, "Thank you" in
Karabandi, and slept again.*

*By the time he could stand he had learned how to say, "Thank you," in
Gandan-o, and a great many other things as well.  They sat for hours
on the wooden deck behind the small house the town had loaned him,
looking down the steep, twist-back street to the world passing slowly
below.  Coriandel was three hundred gallops behind them.  The desert
had given way to chaparral, which was itself turning into the forest
that covered the northern arch of the Brumoso Mountains.  When Vurt
asked his nurse how to say, "I would like to marry you," she laughed
and kissed him for the first time.*

Razi nodded through the bosun's story, while Laeuc, Erileine, and
everyone else walking within earshot chipped in with corrections and
elaborations.  "*La*, and no one ever found out where the creature
came from?"

Uyves glanced at Laeuc.  "Not that I ever heard of."

Laeuc shook his head.  "Nor me.  After he was walking, Vurt went back
into the tunnel to bring out the bones of the Hett boy.  Never heard
him that say he found anything else."

"I didn't know he went back," Erileine said.

The bosun shrugged.  "No reason to think the boy would turn haunt, but
no point taking chances."

The travellers fell silent after that.  They were above the treeline,
and each breath was a cloud of steam that turned to tiny ice crystals
in people's nostrils.  Everyone except Razi had put on gloves and
pulled the flaps of their hats down over their ears.

Despite the cold, the view was magnificent.  Crabby old patches of ice
dazzled white in the early afternoon sun.  Below, gray stone and
green-brown moss gave way to dwarf pines, sea-blue spruce, and braided
pines, their triple trunks twined together.  A little melt-stream
called splashed foam-white through tiny rapids to fall into the small
pool made by an ancient dam, then tumbled down the mountain once again
to fall into space, a tiny echo of the rivers that legend said fell
into infinity over the side of the world.

"Who's that down there?" Donaien pointed to the campground next to the
dam.  Erileine caught a glimpse of a two bent figures hurrying into
the trees, shouldering their heavy packs as they went.

"*La*, is that not the tinker and his apprentice?" Razi asked.

Bosun Uyves scowled.  "Aye.  Probably spent the night here.  He knows
that's not allowed."

Razi's eyebrows went up fractionally.  "No?"

"Nope.  Law says they can't settle anywhere on the mountain."

Razi's eyebrows climbed even further.  "And camping overnight in such
a place is considered 'settling'?"

"Anywhere there's stonework," Donaien said, before the bosun could
reply.  He spat off the side of the road.  "That's the law, not that
it counts for much these days.  One of them owns a whole house now in
Forecastle.  Captain pretends not to see, but–"

"What the captain sees and doesn't see isn't for you or me to have
words about," the bosun said sharply.  "I'll gnaw on Vaszlav's ear the
next time he's in town.  You want to make any more out of it, take it
to the Debates.  Now, come on.  I'm hungry."

As the travellers picked their way down to the campground the Hett had
just fled, Razi stopped a moment to adjust his sandal strap,
straightening up as Erileine went past.  "*La*, so, are you in the
mood for a history lesson?" the bookster asked.

"Sure.  I mean, yes, thank you, bookster."

"So, the tale begins with Yegor the First, who was king in Uws when
your people came to the mountain." The bookster pushed a branch out of
his way, his voice slipping into its familiar lecturing tone.  "He
gave the Hett refuge, and appointed several to his council.  His son,
however–this is Yegor the Second, also called Yegor the Sharp–he
believed the Hett knew the lost secrets of the Pilots, so when he put
on the collar, he demanded that they tell him.  When they said they
knew no more than anyone else, he ordered them expelled.  'By evening
three days hence,' according to the official chronicle, 'They shall be
outwith the borders of our kingdom, taking no more than they
brought.'"

"So what happened?" Erileine asked.

The bookster sighed.  "*La*, having been driven from their homes once
already, the Hett felt disinclined to obey.  They put up barricades,
and fought with all the fury of people who have no more to lose.
Which was perhaps the Sharp's goal all along.  The Sarkoszys were no
longer as secure upon their throne as they had been.  He would not
have been the first king to find himself in need of an enemy.  The
Hett were already unpopular–they were better smiths than the Uwsians,
and many had grown wealthy.  Once the first stones were thrown, the
rest…"

He paused a moment, his eyes focused on the distance.  "Those who fled
north into Ruuda were taken apart by the Pale Remainder.  Those who
went south to Praczedt, *la*, wherever they went, they found Yegor the
Sharp's story of their 'secret knowledge' waiting for them."

"Sounds like you have a soft spot for the Hett." Laeuc's voice behind
them gave Erileine a jolt.  How long had her father been listening?

But Razi was unperturbed.  "They are an interesting people.  *La*,
merely the fact that they *are* a people, after centuries without a
home, makes them interesting."

"Well, best to keep that interest to yourself, at least in company."
Laeuc nodded at the campground ahead of them, where a double dozen
Starboard Towners were already eating hard bread and dried fruit.
Donaien, Armaend, and the bosun had a fire going, and were talking in
low voices as they waited for their kettle to boil.  "Most people
don't feel as charitable toward them as you do."

"Of course." Razi dipped his head.  "I shall endeavor to be more
circumspect in future." Which was not, Erileine thought, the same
thing as saying that he'd stop talking about it.

---

Erileine's legs were aching by the time they crested the spur of rock
called the Cripple's Shoulder to find Forecastle spread out below
them.  He had been disappointed the first time he saw Avaunt's
capitol–it had seemed small compared to the cities he had looked down
on from his grandfather's verandah.  But then his father had led him
down the last half-gallop of road, and the realness of it had taken
his breath away.  It wasn't a picture in a book, or a map, or a
giant's toy on the ground a gallop below.  It was a bustling,
prosperous town.  A few goats nipped at rooftop moss, ignoring the
smoke that rose from the chimneys around them, while chickens cackled
in wicker coops against the side of every second house, but that was
where the resemblance to Starboard Town ended.  Starboard Town's homes
didn't have glass windows.  Its shops didn't have banners strung
proudly over their doors proclaiming the quality of the wares within.
And if Starboard Towners wore silk, it was just an accent laid over
plain cotton, not a whole shirt or a broad, brightly-colored skirt.

Forecastle Road's last half-gallop wound through a pine tree
plantation.  Thin smears of black smoke rose from charcoaling sheds on
either side.  A handful of arborists stripping bark off
recently-felled trees waved to the Starboard Towners.  One, a young
woman with her hair pulled back in a thick club, set her root drill on
the ground and trotted over to say hello to the bosun.  He waved his
companions on.  "I'll catch up with you," he said to knowing grins
from Laeuc and a few others.

The forest ended abruptly a few minutes later.  Thirty strides away,
on the other side of the firebreak, brick and timber buildings lined
cart-wide streets that turned back on themselves like tangled yarn.
Here, the afternoon sun turned a carp pond silver.  There, a vanity
garden tumbled down a wall, rank upon rank of flowers standing bright
and proud in defiance of the impending drought.

The travellers dispersed the moment they arrived, some to visit family,
others hurrying straight to particular shops.  The Forecastlers who
greeted them seemed cheerful enough, but the second thing out of their
mouths was invariably, "We don't know either."  The third was usually,
"You won't like the price." In the two and a half days since the
mountain had changed course, people had been buying all the flour,
smoked cheese, and dried fruit they could find.  Candles, too, and
cotton for bandages, and jars for storing water.  Prices had gone up
like kites in a strong wind.

"Everyone got all panicky," an old woman grumbled when Laeuc,
Erileine, and the bookster stopped to look at the preserves she was
selling.  Her expression was as dark as the blackberry stains on her
fingers.  "What's happening, where are we going, what if the water
runs out, on and on and on.  Feh." She spat the gooey remains of the
cinnamon bark she'd been chewing into a cracked mug.  "The Hett got
right onto it too, of course.  That Klaues fellow, he was in Market
Square in a heartbeat, splashing silver around and tossing what-not
into his wheelbarrow while everyone else was still picking themselves
up."

"Didn't the captain do anything?" Laeuc asked.

She made a face.  "Kind of like asking whether your fingers'll do
something about your thumb, isn't it?  But you mark me–things keep
going on like this, the captain will have to do something whether he
wants to or not."

Whether he wants to or not…  It had never occurred to Erileine that
people could ever force the captain to do something.  The thought felt
as strange as someone else's shoes…

She nearly bumped into her father when Laeuc pulled up short outside a
glasswright's to greet a familiar balding man with a broad smile on
his face, a baby on his hip, and a bundle of cured brown bamboo under
his arm.  "Regi!  Clear day to you too.  Bookster, this is my brother
Reginael.  Regi, this is Bookster Razi, Erileine's master.  And who's
this?  Oh, now, you can't be Annanette, can you?  When did you get to
be so big, eh?"

Razi caught Erileine's eye and smiled as Laeuc made faces at the
wide-eyed baby girl.  Erileine fidgeted from foot to foot until she
could take it no more.  "Paere?  Can we…?"

"Hm?  Oh, of course." Laeuc tousled his daughter's hair fondly.  "You
go ahead, and I'll se you at the Green Pig at sundown.  Do you
remember how to get to there?  Are you sure?  No, don't scowl, I'm
just asking."

"I'm not scowling." Erileine scowled.  "Do you want me to get
anything?"

"How about something for Queçenne?  No more than a quarter bezel,
though.  And not a hair ribbon," he added hastily.

Erileine and Razi left Laeuc making faces at his chubby-cheeked niece.
The bookster seemed to be in no hurry, and Erileine was happy to amble
along beside him.  Here and there, people had built rooms right over
the street, joining houses on opposite sides to create arches.
Mountain swallows whistled at frustrated cats from stick-and-mud nests
on the undersides.  Erileine heard a snatch of Uwsian (at least, she
thought it was Uwsian) from two pale-skinned men arguing amicably on a
bench outside a chocolate seller's.  A dozen strides further on, an
old woman with nimble fingers made a marionette dance and tumble,
nodding solemn thanks every time a coin clinked into the tray at her
feet.  So what if there weren't many kites in the sky as there were
over Starboard Town, or if some of the cobblestones needed weeding,
and some of the narrow alleys they passed smelled of damp garbage?  It
seemed that Forecastle had something new to show her every time they
turned the corner.

Drumlurch Street led to Three Bees Alley, which opened onto a third
street whose name Erileine didn't know that took them up a steep
flight of stairs built against the side of a warehouse past a
barber's, a loom mender's, and a prosperous little Bantangui-style tea
house where chili merchants bought, sold, and speculated day and night
when the mountain was on the ground.

As they rounded yet another corner, Razi said, "*La*, is that not the
bosun?"

Erileine grinned.  "I guess he has a lot of people to talk to." At
that particular moment, Uyves was talking to another young woman, one
whose almond eyes and long fingers showed Bantangui ancestry.  He
nodded at something she said and touched her arm lightly in farewell.

"Whoa!" He jumped slightly when he turned to find Razi and Erileine
standing behind him.  "Well, there you are," he said to Razi.  "I was
wondering where everyone had gone."

"*La*, to market, I believe.  That is why we came, is it not?" the
bookster replied blandly.

Uyves grinned.  "Well then, lead on."

The market lay in the center of town under the watchful gaze of a
sprawling, turreted building called the Hardeck.  The captain's clerks
and mates had their offices on its bottom two floors, while the
captain himself lived on the third, in a suite of rooms that were
supposed to be as richly decorated as the king's own chambers in
Gandan.  Gazing at the Hardeck's gray slate roof, Erileine wondered
where the captain was at that very moment.  Standing in front of the
famous window in the Grand Hall, watching the world roll by?  Or
sitting at a desk somewhere, reading reports and writing orders?  *I
wonder if he knows about Fraederiq?* Erileine thought, suddenly guilty
that she hadn't thought of him since they arrived.

The market itself was as busy as a goat pen at shearing time.  People
from Portside and Aft Landing jostled against second cousins from
Forecastle and Starboard Landing, all of them filling their bags with
anything that wouldn't spoil.  "Five sequins for a jar of plums!"
Erileine said to Razi, scandalized, when the bosun stopped to clasp
hands with someone Erileine didn't know.  "My maere would have a dog!"

Razi shook his head.  "*Masa il-kutna duttaqun as saa.* Have I taught
you that yet?  It is Karabandi.  It means, fill your water jars, a
storm is coming."

Erileine looked around.  No one was smiling.  Everyone's voice had an
edge–not the customary mock-scandalized market-day edge, but something
harsher.  He suddenly remembered his papaere's stories about his
teacher, who had lived through the siege of Armaq.  "Once the last of
the cats were gone, people ate rats," Vurt told his wide-eyed
granddaughter one evening when Erileine's parents were safely out of
earshot.  "And when the rats were gone, they ate each other, one
mouthful at a time…"

"You think there's going to be a storm?" the bosun asked, having heard
only the bookster's last few words.

"*La*, perhaps when we reach the mountains," Razi replied.  "If we
have to go higher to get over them, would we not–*teh!*" Without
warning, he lunged forward to catch a grimy collar.

"Ow!" A small figure struggled furiously, trying to slip out of the
oversized coat the bookster had caught.  "Let go of me!"

"Hoy, what's going on here?" the bosun asked.

"I didn't do anything!  He just grabbed me!  Stinking groundling!  Let
go!"  The boy Razi had grabbed was a head shorter than Erileine, his
curly dark hair hacked short below his ears.  His grimy coat was two
sizes too large for him, but his waxed Bantangui sailing trousers left
a handspan of bare copper-colored ankle above his split-seamed shoes.

Razi shook him.  "*La*, not until you give the nice gentleman his
wallet back, yes?"

The bosun patted his coat.  "Hoy!"

The bookster pushed the boy in front of the bosun.  "It is in his left
pocket."

Stony-faced, the bosun slapped the boy's hands out of the way and
pulled his wallet out of the boy's coat.  "I didn't do it!"  he
yelped.  "He put it there!  Stinking wormy–"

"Quiet!" the bosun bellowed, red-faced.  People around them stared at
the scene, some grinning, some tsk'ing under their breath.

The boy subsided, glaring.  The bosun took his collar from Razi.
"Thank you, bookster.  I'm sure the captain will want to have a word
with our little ragtagger."

Without warning, the boy bent double and pulled his arms free from his
jacket.  As he darted away, Erileine instinctively stuck out her foot.

"Ooph!" Down he went.  The bosun pounced on him.  "Let go of me, you
sock-clutching bent-masted…" His stream of curses set the people
nearby laughing.

Not the bosun, though.  Erileine thought steam was going to start
coming out of his ears.  "Right," he said grimly, "If you want to play
the goat…" He pulled a twist of cord out of his pocket and twisted the
boy's arms behind her back.  "There?  Happy now?" he asked as he tied
the boy's wrists together.

He glared at him, then at Razi, and then spat at Erileine's feet.
Muttering under his breath, the bosun pushed him toward the Hardeck.
"Come on," he said over his shoulder.

"*La*, that was well done," Razi said approvingly.

"Thanks," Erileine muttered.  If she had moved that quickly two days
before, Fraederiq might still be alive…

Instead of marching his prisoner up the broad steps that led to the
Hardeck's front doors, the bosun half-dragged him to a smaller door
that stood in a shadowed recess at ground level.  When he yanked the
dangling cord, a drum thubbed inside.

"Prisoner for charge," he told the uniformed guard who opened the door
a moment later, pushing the boy inside ahead of him.  Erileine and
Razi followed them.

Erileine had never realized that arresting someone involved so much
writing.  Even Razi's patient smile eventually grew forced.  "*La*,
you would think we were in Thind," he muttered as the clerk scribbled
in yet another ledger.

"Sorry," the clerk said unapologetically, handing the ledger book to
Bosun Uyves to sign.  "Procedures, you know.  Must say, I'm glad we
don't have to go through this very often when we're in the air.  At
least, we didn't until this one started showing up."

The bosun looked up.  "You know him?"

The clerk sighed theatrically.  "Oh yes.  I doubt another night in the
dungeon will scare any sense into him, but we'll give it a try.  Thank
you.  Now, can you initial here and here, please?"

Erileine glanced at the boy, who was sitting on a stool in the corner
of the cold stone room with his hands still tied behind his back and
his coat on the floor beside him.  She hadn't known the Hardeck *had*
a dungeon.  He didn't look as though the thought of spending a night
in it scared him.  He looked as if he wanted to bite someone's head
off.

The clerk inked a round stamp and rolled it carefully across the
bosun's signature.  "I think, yes, that should be everything.  No, a
moment, there's–no, no, that's all.  Thank you, bosun." He stood and
nodded.  "Now, you said you wanted to speak to the captain?  Yes?
Good.  He should be upstairs.  You know the way?"

---

The captain was indeed upstairs–three flights of polished granite
stairs, to be exact.  The brass handrail beside them had been worn
shiny-smooth by generations of hands.  Clerks in blue jackets bustled
past the trio from Starboard Town, squawking "shortage" and
"inventory" to one another like strange flightless birds.

Erileine was so busy gawking at the tapestries on the walls and the
statues frowning sternly between them that she stumbled on every tenth
step.  Most of the tapestries were brightly-painted silk from Ini
Bantang and Barra Bantang, though some had faded with age–great age,
she thought, gazing at a bird's-eye view of what could only be the
sunken city of Plange.

"Quite the sight, isn't it?" Bosun Uyves said proudly.

Erileine nodded.  "What's that one?" he asked, pointing.

The bosun shrugged cheerfully.  "Not a clue.  Bookster?"

Razi studied the tapestry.  Glass windows stretched from head-height
to the ceiling at regular intervals, but even so, the building's
interior was growing dim as evening approached.  "The Parliament of
Whales, I believe.  Not bad work." He gestured at the one next to it.
"This, on the other hand, is Ossisswean.  See here?  The squares in
the corner?  *La*, those are the painter's sign.  It is bad luck to
put one's name on someone else's image, so portraitists mark their
work after this fashion.  Now, you notice the way the subject's hands
are clasped in front of his chest?  In a formal portrait such as
this–"

The bosun cleared his throat noisily.  "Sorry, bookster, but you'd
best save the lesson for some other time.  Wouldn't want to keep the
captain waiting."

Despite his own words, the bosun still paused for a few moments at the
top of the stairs to straighten his jacket and run his fingers through
his hair before thumping the little door drum.  "Enter," a deep voice
said.

"Oh…" Erileine gasped.  They were in the Grand Hall–the *Grand Hall*.
One entire wall was a single enormous window.  Below it, the Hardeck
dropped vertically to the steep cliff that formed the mountain's
leading edge.  The great window curved slightly, so if you stood close
to its center and looked straight ahead, you saw nothing except sky.

Paintings from all over Cherne covered the room's rear wall.  Delicate
yet indestructible ruins from the time of the Pilots, the sun rising
over a glacier in Anuvatik, tigers and courtiers in mirrored masks
listening to music on board a palace barge in Thind… None of them
showed Gandan, Mau Ngapcha, or anywhere else the mountain flew over.
Generations of captains had collected pictures of scenes they never
thought to see out their front window.

The only picture from the mountain itself was a scrimshaw plaque
larger than Erileine was tall, carved out of a single bone of some
enormous, long-forgotten creature.  The colors etched into its surface
had faded with age, but they still showed what the ruins on Avaunt's
peak had looked like before the Pilots fell and the mountain tilted
backward.  Half a dozen pillars formed a half-circle around a
flat-topped pyramid the size of a house.  A throne rested on top of
the pyramid, slightly too large for a human being to sit in
comfortably.  The icicleers who climbed the mountain twice a week to
bring snow back to Forecastle gave the place a wide berth.

"Good afternoon, bosun." Erileine jumped.  She hadn't noticed the two
men standing in the corner.

The bosun saluted, nudging Erileine with his elbow to do likewise.
"Good afternoon, *sra*."

The captain returned the salute sharply.  He was stocky and
broad-shouldered, older than Erileine's paere but younger than Papaere
Vurt.  What was left of his close-cropped hair was shot through with
gray, and the wrinkles at the corners of his eyes had been etched by
the sun and endless, patient argument.

The man beside him was taller and lighter, with blue-gray eyes and a
neat mustache.  His high-collared knee-length jacket and trousers were
simply cut, but absorbed the light in a way that hinted at expensive
fabric and fine tailoring, and the lines on his face had been put
there by a lifetime of smiling.

The captain gestured at the paintings.  "I was just asking Klaues what
he thought the odds were that the next captain would have to hang
pictures of Gandan Berth and Mau Ngapcha up there some day.  Any
thoughts on that, bosun?"

"None, *sra*," Uyves said.  "Afternoon, Klaues.  Been arrested
lately?"

The Hett smiled.  "Six days a week, bosun, six days a week.  Any
chance you'll have time for another game of cards this trip?  I
wouldn't mind a chance to get some of my sequins back."

"Plans made, I'm afraid," the bosun replied affably.

The captain cleared his throat.  "I understand you had some excitement
on the way here?"

"Just a little ragtagger, *sra*.  The bookster snagged him, not me."

"Mm." The captain cocked an eyebrow at Razi.  "Anything I should
concern myself with?"

The bookster turned his hands palms-up.  "*La*, your clerk was
pondering a night in the dungeons and some scrubbing of cobblestones."

The captain snorted.  "Bucket full of good that's done in the past.
Anyway, I'm glad you've come–there's a few things I'd like to ask you.
If you'll follow me?  Bosun, you are of course welcome to join us."

Bosun Uyves cleared his throat.  "Thank you, *sra*, but with your
permission, I *do* have some other matters I'd like to look in on
while I'm here"

Erileine saw Klaues stifle a smile as the captain said, "Of course.
Go finish your, um, rounds."

"Thank you, *sra*." The bosun saluted once again and left, humming
softly.

Razi and Erileine followed the captain and Klaues through a side door
to a normal-sized room with normal-sized windows, a low Bantangui
table, and comfortable chairs.  Very comfortable chairs, Erileine
thought, sinking into one moments after the three adults.  She climbed
Slip Street a dozen times every day, but even so, the long walk from
Starboard Town had worn her out.  She wondered if there'd be time to
visit a steam bath before dinner.  *Probably not*, she decided
regretfully.

There was chocolate, though.  An old man in a spotless blue jacket
poured for them and left.  The captain and Klaues picked theirs up and
blew on them gently, but Razi ignored his, so Erileine left hers alone
as well.

"So," the captain said.  "Bookster.  I don't suppose you've turned up
anything that might be of use?"

Razi spread his hands apologetically.  "*La*, not so much as I had
hoped.  I did find an account from Anuvatik of a stone boat that
sailed to the moon and back.  The author–she doesn't give her own
name, but from the style, I would guess her to have been from
Vaarda–said that the boat made the journey several times before
disappearing."

The captain drummed his fingers on the arm of his chair.  "Hm.  What
do you think of it?"

Razi sighed.  "To be honest, I rather suspect it was just a traveller's
tale about Avaunt grown garbled with time and distance.  As I have
been telling my apprentice, being written does not make a thing true."

"I wish more people shared your scepticism," Klaues said regretfully.
"Here.  Have these shown up in Starboard Town yet?"

He took a sheet of cheap gray paper from his pocket and passed it to
Razi.  Erileine craned her neck to look.  The printing was rough and
slightly smeared, but the message was plain.  "The Committee of
Twenty-Nine," Razi read aloud.  "Because there are twenty-nine of
them?"

"Question twenty-nine from the last Debates," the captain grunted.
"About how many Hett should be allowed on the mountain."

"They've gone further this time," Klaues said quietly.  "No Hett on
the mountain at all."

Razi stroked his chin with his fingertips.  "Will they have the voices
they need?"

The Hett shrugged.  "Who can say?  Four days ago, I would have said we
had left this behind us.  Now?  Two of my nephews have had stones
thrown at them in the streets.  Somehow, people seem to think that
what happened on Orangeday is our doing." He laughed.  "It apparently
hasn't occurred to them that if we have magic enough to move the
mountain off its path, throwing stones at us would be less than wise."

"And speaking of magic…" The captain steepled his hands under his
chin.  "Do you know a magician named Thomas?"

Razi smiled broadly.  "Of course!  Do you also?"

"He arrived just before dawn, in some damned flying sailboat.  Scared
the roof goats half to death, and the militia, too.  Apparently Lady
Jangchup–she's the King's Hand these days–is worried enough about us
changing course to send her chief magician hawking after us under full
sail."

Razi laughed.  "*La*, so is old Barramarrabee dead then?  And Roderick
the Rhymer also?"

"*Her* chief magician, not the king's," the captain emphasized.  "He
was very careful to make that distinction.  'Not speaking on behalf of
the Throne and Collar', and so on.  Anyway, he had a few things to say
when I mentioned you were here."

Razi nodded.  "I imagine he would.  We are not friends."

"I gathered that." The captain lifted his cup to his lips.  "But from
what he tells me, you and Lady Kembe are."

Erileine's breath caught.  Lady Kembe was the most powerful magician
in the Karaband–some said in the whole world.  There weren't just
stories about here, there were *legends*.

Razi met the captain's sharp eyes.  "Am I accused of anything?"

"Accused?  No.  But when you boarded in Mau Ngapcha, all you told me
was that you wanted to see what was in the Captain's House library.
There was no mention of you being Lady Kembe's fetch."

"I am no one's fetch." Razi didn't raise his voice, but his tone could
have struck sparks off flint.  "I have served her from time to time,
as I would serve anyone else who wanted old books found and read, but
I am not, and never have been, soul-ridden.  If Thomas says otherwise,
I call him a liar."

The silence that followed stretched as tight as Klaues's smile.  The
captain finally broke it with a sigh.  "Fair enough," he grumbled.
"But you could have said."

Razi spread his hands.  "*La*, there is always much that could be
said, and is not.  And much that is said, that–"

The captain waved him into silence.  "Don't get philosophical on me.
Mind telling me what it is between you two?"

"He tried to kill my previous apprentice," Razi said calmly.  "It is
not the sort of thing one easily sets aside."

The captain looked at Erileine as if she was something Razi had
brought with him from the market.  "I imagine not."

"Tell him about the picture," Klaues said.

"I'm getting there," the captain said testily.  "Here–what do you make
of this?" He picked a book up off on the table and passed it to Razi.

The bookster studied the page in front of him for a moment before
tilting it so that Erileine could see a tinted sketch of a small
village in a mountain valley.  "Ruudian," the bookster said after a
moment.  "See the blues?  And the way the trees are just sticks on a
green background?" Suddenly he laughed.  "*La,* and of course the
artist has signed it, which helps.  Larren Mehgasdottir…  I don't know
the name, but from the style, I would guess it to be a hundred years
old, perhaps somewhat less."

"Mm hm." The captain sipped his chocolate.  "Notice anything special
about it?"

Razi shook his head.  Erileine started to shake hers as well, then
hesitated.  There was something familiar about the scene…  "It's just
like Gandan Berth!" she blurted.  "The big bowl the mountain sits in!"

The captain nodded.  "That's what I said.  Thomas said some spell or
other pulled him to it.  If you flip the page over, it's called *The
Mine at Tinhead*."

"Which is where?" the bookster asked, still studying the picture.

"In Praczedt.  Upriver from Anyalcze.  About three weeks away at our
usual speed, as the parrot flies, though at the rate we're going, we
could be there in…"

"Five days," Klaues volunteered.

"Five days.  Don't suppose there's any mention of the place in any of
your books, is there?"

"*La*, they're actually your books," Razi corrected mildly.  "And no,
not that I recall, but we will certainly look."

"Please." The captain set his empty cup on the table.  "But keep it to
yourself until we know whether there's anything to it.  There's enough
rumors and what-not kiting around right now."

"On my blood," Razi said, dipping his head slightly.

"Thank you." The captain glanced at Erileine.

"Mine too," she said hastily.

The captain stood and tugged his jacket straight.  "Well then.  Thank
you for your time."

Setting the book on the table and standing in turn, Razi bowed
slightly.  "Thank *you*.  But may I ask, can you perhaps tell me where
Thomas is to be found?  I should pay my respects."

The captain's brow furrowed.  "There'll be no blood shed on my
mountain, is that clear?"

Razi placed his right hand over his eyes.  "May I be struck blind."

"Hmph.  He's probably upstairs with the birds.  Said Lady Jangchup
wanted him to send word as soon as he arrived."

"*La*, then if I may excuse myself?  Thank you.  *Sra* Klaues, good
afternoon.  Come, Erileine.  Let us say hello to our young magician."

---

Once upon a time, a captain of Avaunt fell in love with a young man
from Aft Landing.  She was twenty years his senior, but when they
spoke, she felt like a girl again.  But one day, as the mountain lay
berthed at Mau Ngapcha, he disappeared.  Some people say he went
looking for glass flowers to give her as a sign of his love.  Others
say he wanted to see more of the world than what passed below Avaunt,
or lacked the courage to tell the captain that he had tired of her.
Whether he was swallowed whole by a python, drained dry by
parasquitoes, or simply shaved off his mustache and changed his name,
he disappeared

In her grief, the captain locked herself away in the Hardeck's highest
room.  Day after lonely day she sat there, neither eating nor
sleeping, until that part of her that could leave this world did.

The room stood empty after that–her nephew, who became captain in her
wake, feared that she might return as a ghost.  Besides, his leg hurt
from a long-ago fall, and there were many stairs between the Grand
Hall and that room.

Some years later, a family of Gifted condors came to the mountain in
search of a new home.  They were northerners, with gray feathers and
sharp eyes, who had nested peacefully in the Brumoso Mountains their
whole lives.  (Peacefully, but not happily–condors are not naturally
cheerful creatures.) When the people of Ruuda overthrew their undead
masters, a wave of anti-Gifted sentiment swept the country.  Raccoons
argued that the anger would die down, and bears matter-of-factly said
that they would eat anyone who tried to harm them, but the condors
just spread their blunt wings and left their troubles behind.

The captain was happy to give them space: they could carry messages to
and from the surface, and even their ungifted progeny would help keep
the mountain's rabbits in check.  He had the room's window widened and
a screen put in to shelter the birds from the wind and rain.  Twice a
week, on Redsday and Greensday, one of the Hardeck's unluckier clerks
swept the rabbit bones on the floor into a sack for burning, refilled
the birds' water jug, and scraped their droppings off their roosting
posts with an old wooden spatula and a wrinkled nose.  New clerks
sometimes tried to chat with the room's residents, but Gifted condors
are hardly more talkative than their ungifted kin.  No one ever asked
the birds whether the captain's ghost haunted the room, and for their
part, they never saw any reason to say.

"By my eyes, a dozen rabbits, hung 'til they're as ripe as cheese!
Two dozen!  Just go!"

"Nawp." The first voice was human, heavily accented, and exasperated.
The second was an indifferent rasp.  Razi smiled humorlessly and
thumped the door's drum.

"Yep?" the second voice squawked.

Razi pulled the door open and stepped into the room.  Erileine
followed, her mind still whirling.  Razi worked for Lady Kembe?  For
*Lady Kembe*?

"Ah, Razi!  Hello, hello.  So very to see you again.  I've missed the
sound of your sandals behind me–they *are* the same ones, are they
not?  Well made, I must say, to have lasted so long." The magician
appeared to be in his early twenties, with red-gold hair, blue eyes,
freckles, and the whitest teeth Erileine had ever seen.  He wore a
long black skirt and a rich brocade jacket, black and dark green with
red and gold thread twisting through it.  The pattern shifted slightly
each time Erileine blinked.

Razi bowed deeply, fluttering his hands through an elaborate desert
greeting.  "Thomas.  Welcome to Avaunt."

"Thank you, thank you.  You look well."

"As do you.  This is my apprentice, Erileine."

Thomas beamed, as if he had been waiting eagerly to meet some famous
wonder-worker.  "The pleasure, truly, the pleasure."  He folded his
hands in front of his chest.

"Hello," Erileine said awkwardly.

Thomas waited.  When she said nothing more, his smile broadened.  "A
woman of few words, eh?  Like…  Like…  What was his name?  The boy
from Medef?  Eyeun?"

"Eimin," Razi corrected calmly.

"Of course, of course, Eimin.  Splendid fellow, very resourceful.  How
is he these days, do you know?"

"Studious.  Happy.  Alive.  And yourself?"

"Oh, alive as well, very much, and busy, busy, busy.  Lady Jangchup is
wonderful, really.  I am learning *so* much from her, and of course
one is grateful for a chance to serve one's fellows however one can."

"I'm sure one is," Razi repeated dryly.

Thomas raised a finger.  "Now, now, that's two unpleasantries in a
row–let's not have a third, shall we?  There are serious matters afoot
here.  We can't afford to waste time bickering.  Speaking of which…"
He turned back to the condor, who had neither blinked nor moved while
the humans spoke.  "I believe we were discussing rabbits, were we
not?"

"Nawp," the condor squawked.

"Tsk tsk," Thomas clucked.  "I'm *sure* the captain would want my
letter to reach Lady Jangchup without delay.  I implore you–"

"Nawp." The condor shook her head.  She wasn't as ugly up close as
Erileine had expected.  Her beak was cruelly curved, and bald red skin
on her neck hung in loose wrinkles, but her eyes glittered like
mid-winter icicles, and the ruff of white feathers on her chest looked
as warm as a favorite sweater.  "Might not get back.  Might not know
where back was."

Thomas crossed his arms.  "By my eyes, they're as bad as the waiters
in Anyalcze," he said to Razi.  "Do you have any suggestions?  Wait!"
He snapped his fingers.  "Perhaps you could ask Lady Kembe to pass on
a message on my behalf?  She *is* so much better at this kind of thing
than I am."

Razi raised his palms in apology.  "Perhaps the best thing would be if
you carried your message back to Gandan yourself."

Thomas's smile hardened.  Whatever riposte he would have made was
forestalled by wings rustling outside the window.  A moment later, a
second condor sidled into the room.  "Ehp," he squawked.

"Ehp," the first one replied.

"What do they want?" the newcomer asked.

"Message downbelow."

The second condor rustled his feathers.  "Nawp."

"Nawp," the first agreed.  They swiveled their heads in unison to fix
a double stare on Thomas.

"Well, then," the magician said in mock-exasperation that wasn't
really mock at all, "I suppose I'll just have to find some other way.
Thank you for your time." He turned back to Razi, still smiling.
"Razi–as always."

"And you." Razi raised his palms again.

"And good luck with your apprentice.  I hope her education is easier
than her predecessor's was." Thomas caught himself.  "Oh, but I forgot
to ask.  Exactly which of your many trades is this one studying?"

Razi raised his eyebrows at Erileine.  "I'm learning languages,"
Erileine said, feeling foolish.  "I want to be a bookster some day."

"Ah, how worthy.  I'm sure Lady Kembe will find that valuable."

"I'm not learning it for her." Even in his own ears, Erileine sounded
defensive.

"Of course not," Thomas agreed warmly.  "Well, clear day and *mingala
ba* to you both."

"Nasty," the second condor squawked after the door closed behind the
magician.

Razi laughed.  "*La*, yes, like ground glass in rice pudding." His
expression grew serious.  "But truly, are you not flying any messages
today?  Or was that just for his benefit?"

"Nawp." The female condor's head bobbed from side to side.
"Mountain's moving too fast.  Might not be able to get back."

"I see," Razi said thoughtfully.  "Well, if you change your mind–for
anyone–I'm sure the captain would be grateful if you let him know."

The condor tilted her head to study Razi, as if trying to decide
whether he was a rabbit or a tiger.  "Ehp," she finally squawked,
meaning "yes" or "no", or "silly mammal, I already knew that" or
perhaps something entirely bird-ish that Erileine wouldn't have
understood.

She followed Razi down ten flights of stairs to the main floor,
breaking into a trot in places to keep up with the bookster's
long-legged stride.  "Was his jacket magic?" she asked when the
bookster finally slowed down enough for conversation.

"I'm afraid so," the bookster said over his shoulder.  "Have you ever
seen magic before?"

"Sure, a couple of times.  When Fraederiq–" Erileine swallowed.
"Fraederiq broke his arm when we were little.  We were playing dares
on a swing rope, trying to see who could get the highest, and he fell
off.  Gaeston walked up here to get the captain's wife, and she came
and did a spell so that Fraederiq's arm would mend straight." She saw
no reason to add that Fraederiq's father had waited almost a week.  By
the time she reached Starboard Town, his son had been drenched in
fever, and his arm had been mottled.  That had been just a few months
after Fraederiq's mother had left; Fraederiq's arguments with his
father had started almost as soon as he was well enough to stand
again.  "And there was a rock slide a couple of years ago when we
berthed in Mau Ngapcha.  The captain hired a Bantangui to make the
rocks dance themselves into a pile.  He used one of my paere's
flutes."

The bookster nodded.  "Well, unless the world has turned upside down
in the last ten years, you're going to see some more magic done today.
And *la*, there he is.  I'm surprised he doesn't hire a stage and a
crier so that the whole town can watch."

Thomas stood at the bottom of the broad steps in front of the Hardeck.
His brocade jacket hung in the air beside him, as if on an invisible
coat rack.  The market-day crowd had already formed a half-circle in
front of him.  They watched, hushing one another, as he folded a sheet
of creamy blue paper.

"What's he doing?" Erileine whispered.

Razi rolled his eyes.  "Performing," he said in a normal voice.  "He
lives for it, truly.  See?"

Sure enough, Thomas had folded the piece of paper to make a toy bird
small enough to nestle in the palm of his hand.  He raised it to his
lips and blew on it gently.  Its tiny wings fluttered, then flapped.
It rose from his palm and circled his head like a strange blue wasp.
A few people applauded.  Thomas whistled sharply.  The bird shot away
westward.  "Show-off," Razi grunted.

Thomas raised his arms over his head and whistled again.  His coat
flapped as if caught in a strong wind to settle neatly on his
shoulders.  Before Erileine's astonished eyes, the buttons did
themselves up.  Thomas smiled broadly as a few more people applauded,
then strolled toward the closest stall like a princess inspecting her
stables.

"Idiot." Razi shook his head.  "*La*, Erileine, truly, there is no one
as stupid as a clever man." He gathered his *deel* around him with one
hand and strode away.

Erileine followed him through the end-of-day bustle of the market
closing up.  Some vendors were disconsolately wrapping up the entire
stock they had brought that morning.  Buckles and straps for climbing
harnesses, copper jewelry set with colored glass, embroidery
thread–the worried Avauntois had barely glanced at them.  Those
selling onions, sacks of rice, cured peppers, palm oil, and rabbit
traps, on the other hand, had nothing to take home except jingling
strings of coins.  Some had raised their prices five times before
noon, and five times again before sunset.  "Scandalous!" people
exclaimed, but they paid.

Razi had to stop every dozen strides to let Erileine catch up.  When
they finally reached the narrow streets on the market's other side,
Razi glanced at her.  "So, do you know the way, or shall we ask
someone for directions?"

"I know the way."  But then the question that had been swelling in
Erileine's mind spilled out.  "Bookster–did you know the mountain was
going to change course?"

Her teacher blinked.  "By all the saints who laugh–whatever gave you
that idea?"

"I don't know." But Erileine *did* know, and somehow the ache in her
muscles from day's long walk gave him the courage to say, "It just–it
seems like too much for coincidence.  You coming here, and, you know,
what Thomas said." She shrugged uncomfortably.

Razi nodded.  "*La*, you mean the fact that I have worked for someone
as famous for meddling in the world as Lady Kembe?"

Erileine shrugged again.  "And the other night, when you said you were
meditating.  I heard you talking to someone, but there wasn't anyone
else in the room."

"*La*, that." Razi sighed.  "It had been a day for stories and
secrets, hasn't it?  So, I will share one more with you, though I must
ask you to keep it to yourself.  You don't have to," he continued,
raising a hand to forestall whatever Erileine had been about to say.
"If you decide the captain really ought to know, then of course you
will tell him.  But…" He lowered his hand.  "It may be nothing–just a
grain of sand in her shoe.  *La*, and if she had any name but her own,
no one would pay it any attention.  I will therefore ask you to think
carefully before repeating what I tell you."

He waited, a lean dark figure in desert brown, standing in the early
evening half-light on a narrow cobbled street a thousand gallops from
the city of his birth, while his apprentice wrestled with her
conscience.  Finally Erileine nodded.  "All right."

"Thank you.  Lady Kembe has dreams sometimes, dreams that are more
than dreams.  These last few years, they have shown her people falling
from a great height and a shadow moving across the land.  It could
mean nothing.  It usually has, in the past–divination is a chancy
thing.  But still, better to search and not find than not to search.
Since she cannot come here herself…"  He turned his palms up.  "Here I
am."

Erileine scowled.  "So the captain was right.  You *are* her fetch."

Razi's hand was suddenly on Erileine's collar.  "I will say it again,"
he told his apprentice calmly.  "I am nobody's fetch, and never have
been.  Lady Kembe has done this world greater service than it
knows–*la*, greater than it deserves, I sometimes think–but if she
ever tried to bend my will, I would write her name on the wall just so
that I could piss on it.  I do this for her because if she is, then I
am afraid.  And if a smiling tapeworm like Thomas is crawling around
as well, then I am doubly afraid, because where she would act to keep
the world in balance, he would look only to see what advantage he
might find." He let go of Erileine's collar and smoothed it down.
"Now, let us find your father.  Half the mountain is here today, and
if we do not claim beds for ourselves soon, *la*, we will have to
perch upstairs with the birds."

---

FIXME: anti-Hett riot (show the bigotry); Hett are badly hurt (we see
the way they've been persecuted); Jaromir is involved (we see that
he's a fighter); Erileine and Laeuc wonder if they're on the right
side.

---

The mood on Forecastle's streets the next morning was stretched as
taut as a violin string.  People kept their heads down and spoke in
low voices.  They all jumped when the innkeeper's young son dropped a
plate, making the boy burst into tears.

The bosun didn't look surprised when Razi said that he was going to
stay in Forecastle.  "Just for a few days," he promised.  "Until
things settle."  The bosun's sour look said what he thought the odds
were of things settling down in a few days.

"Absolutely not," Laeuc said firmly when Erileine asked if she could
stay too.  "Your mother would skin me and dip me in brine."

"But paere!"  Erileine pleaded.  "I'm his apprentice!"

Laeuc finally relented–he always did–but only after Erileine swore
that she would go straight to Uncle Regi's if anything happened.  As
his youngest daughter raced upstairs to grab her pack, he drained the
last of his tea.  It didn't seem to help the lump in his throat.

Erileine followed Razi through the streets to the Hardeck.  People
measured them sidelong as they passed–a tall black figure in a
dust-colored *deel*, and a round-faced brown girl trailing in their
wake–but no one smiled or said hello.  "Where are we going?" she
finally asked, puffing slightly as she hurried to keep up with the
long-legged bookster.

"*La*, the captain has asked Thomas to have a look at the mountain."
Razi paused to let two squabbling women carrying a heavy chest of
drawers go by.  "And he asked me to keep an eye on Thomas, so…"

Forecastle's lone air dock lay at the bottom of a stairway that ran
down the cliff overlooked by the Hardeck.  The dock itself was a
weatherbeaten pine shelf, ten strides deep and forty long, whose
tree-trunk railing posts doubled as stanchions.  Tiny compared to
those at Ruuda-in-Ruuda or Yadanapore, it was adequate for the clouds,
magic carpets, and more unusual visitors the mountain received between
its northern and southern berths.

The *Presumption* was the dock's only tenant that morning.  She was
smaller than Erileine had expected: a single mast with a furled white
sail, narrow benches on either side of a low-roofed central cabin only
slightly larger than a double bed, and a simple plank rudder.  If the
little boat hadn't been bobbing gently up and down in thin air, she
wouldn't have given it a second look.

Razi tossed his bag into the boat.  As he stepped over the gunwale,
Thomas said, "What about your apprentice?"

Razi froze.  His face twitched.  "I beg your pardon?"

Thomas raised his eyebrows innocently at Erileine.  "Have you flown
before?  There's really nothing like it."

Erileine stared at Thomas blankly.  "Um…"

"She will not need to accompany us," Razi said firmly.

"Really?  But they're always so *helpful*, your apprentices." The
magician's smile broadened.  "And just think of how educational it
will be for her.  Your apprentices always learn so *much* when they
travel with us."

Erileine could almost hear the space between the two men's locked eyes
crackle.  She bit her lip and tried not to look like a hungry kitten
when Razi glanced at her.

Sighing, Razi slid over to make room.  "*La*, come on then."

As Erileine stepped awkwardly into the flying boat, Thomas slipped the
stay cord off the rudder.  "Sit on the other side," he instructed, his
voice serious for once.  "We'll be off balance otherwise.  And hold
onto the gunwale.  And whatever you do, don't stand up unless you want
to fall down.  A long way down."

He didn't do anything that Erileine could see, but the sail suddenly
bellied out, full of wind.  The boat rose smoothly and swiftly into
the air.

Her knuckles white on the gunwale, Erileine peered over the side.  *So
this is what birds see,* she thought.

The Hardeck was a slate-roofed L, the market square a bustling jigsaw
of color in front of it.  A lake of brown faces looked up, some
shading their eyes, others pointing or waving.  Forecastle spread out
around them, gray cobblestones making crooked gray streams between the
canyon walls of the houses.  Chickens squawked and clucked in rooftop
coops; smoke rose from a double hundred chimneys, and kites fluttered
in the wind.  It was different than looking down on the world from
Avaunt–closer, faster, and a thousand times more exciting.

The boat's green and white pennant snapped above the sail as they
climbed higher and higher.  Vertigo suddenly rose in her throat as she
remembered Fraederiq falling …

Thomas banked to starboard.  "Rather the view, isn't it?" he said
loudly.  "Shall we go under?"

"What?  I mean, pardon?"

"Shall we go under the mountain?  It's quite spectacular."

"No," Razi said firmly.  "Just the sides."

Thomas rolled his eyes at Erileine and swung the rudder to the side.
The *Presumption* came about obediently.  Erileine suddenly realized
that they were sailing straight into the wind.  She wasn't sure, but
she thought that was supposed to be impossible.  *Then again,* she
thought giddily, *We're flying.  In a boat.*

A moment later they weren't over the mountain any more, but beside it.
Erileine's ears were freezing, but she didn't notice.  The mountain
was so big, so rich with detail.  The sheet moss that hung on the
braided pines was northern, as were the pines themselves.  The jungle
creeper vines that sprouted brown and yellow from tiny cracks in the
rock were from the south.  The cold killed them off when Avaunt went
north, but they recolonized it every time the mountain returned to Mau
Ngapcha.

And the birds–how could she not have realized there were so many
birds?  Thousands of them nested in every nook and cranny they could
find, on ledges too narrow even for goats' feet, in the branches, or
in round nests made of mud and sticks that clung directly to the rock.
Irvings from the north, blue-crested cockatiels from the south,
steelbirds with their blood-red beaks, and others Erileine couldn't
name.  Everything human seemed insignificant compared to the
mountain's looming bulk.  *We're just fleas on a whale's back,* she
thought with no regard at all for zoology.

A tawny-crested gull suddenly appeared beside them, wings spread to
hold the breeze as it tilted its head to study the boat.  No food
there, it decided, tipping to the side and soaring away with a
disappointed cry.

"*La*, over there," Razi said, pointing.  "See?" Two orange-furred
trolls, mother and child from their size, swung from branch to branch
through the pines.

"Whoa," Erileine said in awe.

Razi smiled.  "They will have tales to tell when they get home, I
think."

Erileine gaped.  "Do you think they're Gifted?"

"Ah?  Oh, *la*, no, no, I just meant…" The bookster shook his head,
amused.  "No, I'm sure they're not.  They would have asked for
sanctuary by now if they were."

"Oh." Other than Jack, and the condors, and a raccoon who had tried
and failed to sell bad poetry in Forecastle the year before, Erileine
had never met a Gifted animal.

"Whoa!" She clutched the gunwale as the boat turned sharply–so sharply
that even Razi lurched.  "Look!" the magician pointed.  "There, you
see?"

For a moment Erileine didn't understand what he was pointing at, but
then the darkness on the face of the cliff resolved itself.  It was
the mouth of a tunnel, too rectangular to be natural.  Like everything
left behind by the Pilots, the steps inside were tilted a quarter-arc
from true.

Beside the tunnel, two men in rough clothes were scrambling up the
rock face as fast as they could.  Both had axes on their backs, and
both wore climbing harnesses anchored by long ropes to trees growing
above the tunnel mouth.  As Erileine watched, they dove into the
undergrowth and vanished from view.

"Can you take us closer?" Razi asked Thomas.

The magician nodded briskly.  "Your wish is my every desire.  Best to
hold on, though.  The wind might be a little playful."

"Playful" turned out to be an understatement.  As they neared the
cliff, the air being shouldered aside by the mountain made the
*Presumption* dance like a scrap of cinnamon bark in a pot of boiling
water.  Thomas held them as steady as he could twenty strides away
from the cliff face while they studied the tunnel mouth.  It had been
weathered smooth by centuries of southern rain, desert grit storms,
and northern frost, but inside, the stairs inside could have been cut
that morning.

A dozen freshly-cut stumps clustered around the tunnel mouth.  *It
would have been hellish hard work*, Erileine thought.  Dangling in a
harness as you swung the ax, having to watch that you didn't chop
through the rope you were hanging on…  They must have been at it for
hours.

But something else was asking for her attention.  Something about the
vests the two men had been wearing…  "They're Hett!" she exclaimed,
immediately adding, "At least, I think so."

Razi studied the mountainside thoughtfully.  "*La*, well, I think this
deserves the captain's notice, don't you?"

"Indeed," Thomas said.  "Travel is *so* educational, isn't it?" He
smiled at his passengers and nudged the rudder, setting the boat's
course forward once again.

As they neared the market square, voices shouted in unison.  They
rounded the corner to discover that half the stalls had been cleared
away to make a parade ground.  "Hwah!" Forecastle's gray-haired bosun
and his three mates shouted orders, corrections, encouragement, and
abuse as a dozen squads of spearmen and archers lunged and knelt, drew
and released.  Beneath their boots lay the outline map of Cherne that
she had heard described, but had never before seen.  White
cobblestones set among the gray showed the continent's coastline; red
ones showed the mountain's path from Mau Ngapcha to Gandan.  A
spatter-edged streak of paint showed the mountain's most recent
course.

The usual pair of guards stood outside the Hardeck's main doors.
Today, though, they wore helmets and gorgets, and gave the approaching
travellers a careful up-and-down as they climbed the stairs.
"Magister," one said to Thomas, nodding respectfully while the other
opened the door.

"Thank you," the magician said politely.  He swept inside like royalty
with Razi and Erileine in his wake.

The captain was in the Grand Hall, his hands clasped behind his back,
a frown furrowing his forehead.  He turned away from the window as
they entered.  "Bookster, magister," he nodded.  "Have you found
anything to brighten my day?"

Razi shook his head.  "*La*, no, not in your library.  But elsewhere…"
He quickly described the men they had seen.

The captain's expression hardened as the bookster spoke.  "By all the
failed saints," he swore.  "Klaues swore this was nothing to do with
his people."

"*La*, perhaps he is as ignorant of what is being done as we were,"
Razi suggested.  "From what I am told, the tinker's assistant is new
to the mountain."

The captain scowled.  "I doubt many people will think that far.
Anyway, it looks like we're headed for Tinhead after all.  Take a
look." He gestured at the window.

Erileine followed the line of the captain's pointing finger.  The
mountains in front of them were ridged and ragged like a crumpled
carpet, snow-white and pine-green.  Without warning, the scene swam
and re-formed.  She yelped and threw up her arms even as the view
steadied again.

"Oh, well done," Thomas murmured appreciatively.  "Well done."  The
panes to the left and right showed what they had a moment before, but
the one in the center had pulled the view closer.  Instead of
mountains fifty gallops away, they were looking at a neat town from
what appeared to be no more than a few hundred strides.  Its
buildings, made of gray brick and roofed with dark slate shingles,
stood in a figure eight around two squares.  Sun glistened on glass in
the buildings' windows–more glass than Erileine had ever seen–but the
only sign of life was a lone jay that fluttered away even as they
watched.

"It's beautiful work," Thomas said, ignoring the view and running a
gentle fingertip across the glass.  "Absolutely beautiful.
Korrandarrenduk?"

The captain shook his head.  "Ip of Seyferte.  About three hundred
years ago.  There used to be another one at Aft Landing, but some
Bantangui pirate smashed it to bits about a hundred years ago."

"May he be reborn to misery a thousand thousand times." Thomas spoke
the curse without rancor.  "Do you mind me asking its price?"

The captain shrugged.  "My name.  And I can't leave the mountain."

"Ah." Thomas nodded sympathetically.  "Ip was never one to use a pin
when a lance would do."

"*La*, captain, can you move the focus?" Razi interrupted.

The captain nodded.  "Yes.  But only to things that you could see that
are in view anyway."

Razi pursed his lips.  "*La*, so, where is the picture of Tinhead?
The one from the book?"

The captain jerked his thumb at the wall.  "I stuck it up there next
to the whales."

Razi blinked.  "*La*, you tore it out of the book?"

"No, of course not.  I used a razor.  Why?"

Razi stared at the captain.  "Perhaps…  perhaps in future a copy would
suffice, yes?" he said stiffly.

The captain and Thomas exchanged amused looks as Razi took the page
down from the wall.  He held it up in front of the window, glancing
back and forth between it and the scene in front of them.

"*La*, so, can you show us what's to the left, please?" he asked.  The
captain passed his hand slowly in front of the window.  The view slid
sideways, making Erileine's stomach lurch.  Pines no different from
Avaunt's, and rocks, and a fence around an empty pasture–

"Stop!  There."  Razi pointed.  A tower twenty stories high stood
against the side of the mountain.

"Why in the names of the saints would anyone build something like that
in the middle of nowhere?" the captain demanded testily.

"Because you expect something to come to it?"  Erileine said.  She
blushed under the sudden weight of three pairs of adult eyes.
"Sorry," she muttered.  "I just thought…"

Thomas beamed.  "You *do* pick bright ones, don't you?  One day I
shall have to ask you how you find them.  My apprentices have all been
a great disappointment."

"Hold the reins a moment," the captain interrupted.  "It must have
taken years to build that thing!  Do you think someone's been planning
this for that long?"

Thomas shrugged.  "Who can say?  A closer look might give us some
answers."

The captain frowned.  "I could send one of the condors."

"*La*, but how long would that take?" Razi said.  "Whereas if we left
now, we could be back in time to spoil your dinner."

"We?"  Thomas blinked theatrically.  "As in, you and me?  Razi… I
thought you said you'd see me dead before you'd set foot on the
*Presumption* again."

"That was more of a hope than a requirement," the bookster replied.

"Stow it," the captain ordered sharply.  He frowned at the view in
front of him.  If the top-most branches of the trees hadn't been
swaying gently in the afternoon breeze, Erileine could have believed
it was some strange kind of painting.  "All right.  Do you want a
couple of my men along, just in case?"

"I'm sure we'll be fine," Thomas said politely.  "If we leave now, we
ought to have enough light to find our way back." He gestured toward
the door.  "After you?"

As they turned to leave, Razi pulled a string of coins out of the
sleeve of his *deel*.  "Take these and find us a room," he ordered, as
if Erileine had done it for him a dozen times before.  "Somewhere
close by–*la*, closer than the Green Pig, if you can.  I would prefer
quiet to noisy, and small to large, and a bath above all other
things."

A few minutes later, Erileine stood alone on the Hardeck's steps.  She
hefted the string of coins.  It was more money than she had ever held
in her life.  Somewhere with a hot bath *would* be nice.  Somewhere
with a hot bath and a library would be even nicer.

Erileine didn't think of herself as shy, but he had never had to ask a
stranger for directions before.  She had always been able to follow
her father through the streets and alleys that doubled back on
themselves, met at odd angles, or, in the case of the one she was now
on, dead-ended against the front door of a bootmaker's.

Voices rose and fell inside.  "Hello?" she said uncertainly, pushing
the door open.

The two women sitting behind the long trestle table inside looked up
and said, "Clear day," in unison.  Both had their hair in braids
pulled back and tied with twists of silk.  Planks of dark brown
leather lay in neat stacks behind them, while half-finished boots lay
in pieces or stood upside down on lasts before them.  A samovar as big
as a goat's head took up one entire end of the table.  The sugary
smell coming from it made Erileine's stomach grumble.

Erileine cleared his throat.  "Clear day.  I'm, um, we're visiting.
From Starboard Town."

"With the bosun?" the woman on Erileine's left asked immediately.

The one on the right rolled her eyes.  "Shush, Gisaelle, let the girl
speak."

"Um, sort of.  He went back yesterday.  I'm just, I'm supposed to find
somewhere to stay.  Do you know anywhere?  Somewhere small and
nearby?"

"The Sign of the Three Rabbits," the woman on the right said.  "It's
the bosun's favorite when he's here, isn't that right, Gisaelle?  Very
quiet for those who don't want to be disturbed." She elbowed the other
woman in the ribs.

Gisaelle blushed.  "It's a very good inn," she said, a little weakly.

The first woman snorted.  "I'm sure.  Anyway, two up on your left to
the cordwainer's, go down the alley, left again to the stairs by the
flower seller, top of the stairs.  Not far at all, isn't that right,
Gisaelle?"

"Far enough for people who don't want other people sticking their
noses into things that are none of their business," the woman on the
left said sharply.

When they wanted a scare, Avauntois children told each other about a
house in Aft Landing (or maybe Portside, it depended who was telling
the story).  There was nothing behind its back door but empty air, and
when children were nosy, the evil magician (or Hett, or ghost) who
lived there sent them out back to fetch firewood.

Erileine felt like she had just stepped through that door.  She raised
his palms with a hasty, "Thank you, ladies, that's very helpful, much
appreciated," and fled.

A grin split her face as she walked toward the cordwainer's.  She
would *definitely* have to ask the bosun about his boots when he got
home.  Of course, the story would be better if he knew the name of the
shop…

She turned impulsively at the thought.  The small figure two dozen
strides behind her instantly turned around as well.  "Hoy!" Erileine
exclaimed.  "Hoy, you!" It was the ragtag boy who had tried to steal
the bosun's wallet.  "Stop!" But he had already disappeared into a
side alley like a rabbit going down a hole.

Erileine thrust her hand into her pocket and whooshed with relief.
The coins Razi had given her were still there.  Wasn't the boy
supposed to be in a dungeon?  She hurried up the street.  As soon as
she found an inn, she would go back to the Hardeck and tell them he
had escaped.

The Sign of the Three Rabbits was as big as the Captain's House in
Starboard Town, and just as well kept.  Knee-high wooden planters
filled with red and yellow azaleas stood guard on either side of its
spotless yellow front door.  More flowers watched primly from matching
planters on the window sills.  Symmetric blue whorls were painted on
either side of the door frame, Bantangui style, representing the ears
that were supposed to listen for malicious gossip about the house's
residents.  The old woman snoring in a wicker rocking chair on the
balcony above the door made the picture complete.

Erileine yanked the braided cord that hung by the door.  A drum
thumped inside, but no one answered.  He pulled the cord again,
harder.

The snoring stopped.  "Who is it?" a voice yawned.

Erileine stepped back from the door and looked up.  The old woman was
rubbing her eyes, her dark brown face silhouetted against the sky.

"Clear day, *sra*," she said politely.  "I'm looking for a room for
the night.  The bootmakers said you might have one?"

The old woman dug the last of her nap out of the corners of her eyes.
"On your own?" she asked doubtfully.

Erileine shook her head.  "No, *sra*.  I'm Bookster Razi's apprentice.
The room's for both of us." She held up her string of coins and
jingled them.

A few minutes later, Erileine had exchanged a half-ring and sixpence
for a pair of wooden tokens that might have looked like rabbits to
whoever had carved them.  The old woman certainly knew Bosun Uyves.
Very popular, the bosun was.  Easy to see why, with shoulders like
his, and that smile, and of course everyone said he was such a good
dancer, not that she had ever had a chance herself, her dancing days
were far behind her, just as Erileine's were still in front of er.
She did dance, didn't she?  With anyone in particular yet?  No?  Oh,
that would come, that would come, not to worry.  Why, she herself had
been fifteen the first time someone had asked her to dance.  A
vagabond, he turned out to be, not like the bosun, but of course she
couldn't have known that at the time.  Now, did she want to leave
those bags with her, or in the room?  Oh, yes, the room had a lock, of
course, and not just for when they were berthed at Gandan or Mau
Ngapcha, no, sad to say, the mountain had thieves of its own,
indwellers most of them, or Hett, the saints alone knew why the
captain let either onto the mountain, not that she was questioning his
judgment, of course, he was a fine captain, though his predecessor
*had* been much firmer about such things.  That camp of theirs by the
sawdust tips was as good as being a little town of its own now, wasn't
it?  And that house on Squid Street, well, it shouldn't be allowed,
not that it was her place to decide that, of course, the captain knew
his business, he was a fine man, just as Bosun Uyves was a fine, fine
man, very popular, and easy to see why, of course, with shoulders like
his, and that smile…

Her words splashed over Erileine like the monsoon rains of Mau
Ngapcha.  She kept smiling and saying, "Yes, *sra*," and "Thank you,"
and turning toward the door, but the torrent of words didn't stop
until she backpedalled onto the street.

And so Erileine found herself alone in the biggest town on Avaunt with
time on her hands and money in her pocket.  Emboldened by her success
in finding the Three Rabbits, she asked a man walking by with a rack
of skewered chickens over his shoulder for directions.  Booksellers'
Cross?  Down that way was fastest.  Erileine ducked to avoid being
clouted by a dead chicken as he turned to describe the route.

Anyone watching would have thought Erileine was ambling without a care
in the world–at least, that's what she hoped.  She peered into shop
windows, stopped to study herself in the half-height mirror chained to
the wall in front of a tailor's, and doubled back on her own trail
half a dozen times.  She never looked directly at the ragged figure
trailing in her wake.  It was just like trying to round up Mamaere
Mayeule's cat: you had to get *it* to chase *you*…

But eventually her shadow disappeared.  Disappointed, she doubled back
once more, but the boy was gone.  She shrugged, trying to be
philosophical.  At least now she could actually go and look at some
books.

His father had first taken him to Booksellers' Cross on his eighth
naming day.  The booksellers had rolled their eyes at one another, all
thinking, "Here's another one," as they remembered themselves at her
age.

Novels, pamphlets, diaries… Poetry, medicine, recipes, magic, and law…
Gandan-o, Ruudian, Uwsian, Bantangui, Praczny, and languages Erileine
didn't yet recognize…  Lost among the petrified learning, the frozen
elsewheres and elsewhens, she took no more notice of time passing than
she did of her own breathing.

She leafed through every Praczny book she found, finally selecting a
tract on the rights of Gifted animals and a collection of romantic
stories full of noble knights who left their loves behind for seven
years while they quested after tin rings that held their parents'
souls, or magicians who were wrongly imprisoned for necromancy, only
to be saved (or doomed) when a king in waiting fell in love with them.
She weighed them in his hands, then put the tract back where she had
found it.  His mother and Queçenne would prefer the stories, she told
herself, not admitting to herself that she'd enjoy them too.

"Three rings," the bookseller said when Erileine asked its price.

Her jaw dropped.  "Three rings!?"

The bookseller shrugged without looking up from the water-stained
collection of fishing poems he was carefully mending.  He was as tall
as Razi, but skinny where Erileine's teacher was merely lean, and had
stupendously bad breath.  "That's cheap.  Possibly the only cheap
things left on the mountain, books.  Beans and wool, they're what's in
fashion these days." He snorted, sawing delicately at the book's
binding with a scaling knife.

Erileine sighed.  A half-ring, and he might have bought it.  But three
rings!

She scowled.  "A half-ring and eightpence."

"No." The bookseller didn't even look up.

"All right, a half and ten," Erileine offered.  "Look, the spine is
almost broken.  I'll have to stitch the pages back together in a year
or two."

The bookseller glanced at the book, then at Erileine.  "Two rings a
half and sixpence, not a fingernail less." He shrugged again.  "I
can't sell it for less than I paid, can I?"

"I suppose not," Erileine said, defeated.  She could probably find
something that se could afford, but after deciding she wanted the
stories, anything else would feel second best.  And anyway, it was
getting late.  She should get back to the Hardeck and wait for Razi.

Two new guards stood at the Hardeck's front doors.  As far as they
were concerned, young Starboard Towners belonged in Starboard Town
while all this fuss was going on.  "But I'm Bookster Razi's
apprentice," Erileine protested.  "I was getting us a room.  At the
Three Rabbits."

One of the guards raised his eyebrows at that.  The other shook his
head.  "Can't go in without an escort."

"But I'm supposed to meet him here!"

The guard shook his head again.  "Not without an escort."

"All right." Erileine thought for a moment.  "Well, if you see the
bookster, can you please tell him we're at the Sign of the Three
Rabbits?"  The guard supposed he could do that, so Erileine thanked
him and headed for the sky dock.

The shadows were lengthening when Erileine reached it, and the cold
air felt damp.  She shivered and hunched her shoulders so that she
could bury her chin in the collar of her coat.

The land below was beautiful.  Orange sunset reflected off ponds and
streams nestled in countless little valleys, the snow on the peaks of
the mountains around Avaunt, and the clouds grazing near the horizon.
It could have been the approach to Gandan Berth, except there wasn't a
road or a building in sight.  Traders from all over the Nine Marches
would be on their way to meet Avaunt at that centuries-old rendezvous.
How many of them already knew that the mountain wasn't going to be
there?

There!  That dot.  She brought her hand up to shield her eyes.  It had
to be Thomas's flying boat, the *Presumption*.  She was coming in
fast, Erileine realized–very fast.

She waved.  A tiny arm wave back.  She dragged a couple of bumpers
over to the dock's edge, looped their nooses around stayposts, and
kicked them under the railing so that they dangled over the side.

The *Presumption* was only fifty strides away when Erileine realized
that something was sticking out of her hull.  Her belly went cold.  It
was an arrow, but as thick around as her arm.  Splinters starred the
planks around its puncture like a frozen shout of pain.

Thomas steered the *Presumption* in close, yelling, "Clear away!"
Erileine scrambled back.  As the flying boat thudded against the
bumpers, he threw an end of rope at Erileine.  "Tie her fast!" he
ordered.  "Fates and Furies, what a mess!"

"Where's Razi?" Erileine asked as she made a clumsy knot.

Thomas slipped around the mast to the boat's bow and jumped onto the
dock with another length of line in his hand, heedless of the
half-gallop of empty air below him.  "It's not that I think it would
be much of a loss," he said as he tied the boat fast.  "But *she*
would never believe that I didn't have a hand in it.  Here, get that
gangplank over here." He hopped back into the boat.

"But where's Razi?" Erileine repeated.  Panic was like cold soup in
her throat.

Thomas crouched down.  "Come on," he grunted, "Stop messing up my
boat." He straightened, his right arm around Razi's back, his left
holding the bookster's arm across his shoulders.

"*La*, so, put down a rug next time," Razi mumbled.  His *deel* was
slick red with blood.  More was leaking through the fingers he had
pressed against his side.

He and Thomas stumbled down the gangplank like drunkards.  As they
reached the dock, the bookster tripped over his own unsteady feet and
collapsed.

---

"He's half-empty," Nuu Ciy said matter-of-factly, washing her hands in
a basin of soapy water.  "And if it had been a thumb to the left, he'd
be compost.  As it is…"

"As it is?" the captain prompted.

His wife was a head shorter than Erileine, but carried herself as if
she was as big as the mountain.  She dried her hands on a scrap of
cotton and dropped it into a shallow copper bowl whose sides were
sticky with Razi's blood.  She sighed and started untying her apron.
"As it is, he'll live, unless he does it again."

"Thank you, love." The infirmary on the ground floor of the Hardeck
was as big as the Grand Hall.  Two dozen wooden beds lined one wall;
the other was completely taken up with shelves.  Bandages and spools
of strong cotton thread stood next to trays of scalpels and
wicked-looking bone saws.  Night had fallen, so the only light came
from pieces of dayglass set in bamboo sconces above the beds.

Nuu Ciy had stitched Razi's wound closed as carefully as Papaere Vurt
would stitch up a torn boot, and about as gently.  She had muttered
small spells the whole time, pleas for strength and wards against
infection that made her hands glisten faintly.  Erileine wondered what
she was giving up on Razi's behalf: a little more of her sense of
smell, perhaps, or her memory of the bright blue dress she had worn on
her tenth naming day.

Through it all, Thomas sat on the bed next to Razi's, watching Nuu
Ciy's work with professional curiosity.  Erileine had almost (almost)
punched him when he told Erileine that he couldn't help Razi.  "But
he's dying!" she had shouted.

"Yes, so the faster you get help, the better," he repeated for the
third time.

"But why can't *you* fix him!?" she pleaded.

"Because I like being able to open doors for myself," the magician
snapped.  "And having to return to this dreary venue once a year for
the rest of my life would be unspeakably tiresome.  Now, are you going
to do something useful, or shall we sit back and wait for those
imbecile condors?"

Erileine had gone for help.

As Nuu Ciy's assistants scrubbed streaks of blood off her arms, the
captain turned to Thomas.  "So, there was no warning at all?"

Thomas shook his head.  "None.  As I said before–twice, I believe–we
were still a gallop from town.  They must have hidden siege bows in
the trees by the road." He yawned suddenly.  "Clever of them, I must
say.  I mean, they can't actually have been *expecting* us."

The captain's scowl showed what he thought of Tinhead's inhabitants
being clever.  "And there was just the one shot?"

Thomas shrugged.  "There may have been more afterward, but I turned
tail the instant we were hit.  It's rather vexing, you know.  I put a
lot of work into that boat–it will take ages to mend her."

The guard at the door cleared his throat meaningfully.  "What?"  the
captain barked.

"Chief Steward, *sra*.  Wants to know if you'll want dinner brought
down."

"Saints.  No, I'll take it upstairs as usual.  You might as well get
back to your post.  Oh, and Eamile?  No telling tales, understood?"

"Yes, *sra*." The guard saluted sharply, right fist to left breast.

The captain sighed again.  A hundred people had seen Razi carried into
the Hardeck, unconscious and dripping blood.  By now, half the town
would be saying that he had been attacked by griffins, gargoyles, or
gaunts, while the other half would be just as sure that he and Thomas
had fought a duel on board the magician's flying boat.  He'd be dead
and risen, or have vanished in a puff of smoke.

"And someone will find a way to blame the Hett," he said sourly.

"*Sra?*" Erileine said uncertainly.

"Nothing," the captain said, clapping her on the shoulder, his eyes on
Razi.

Nuu Ciy unstoppered a small black bottle and painted a few drops of
poppy tar on Razi's lips with the trimmed end of a gull's feather.
"He'll sleep until morning," she announced, re-corking the
sweet-smelling mixture.  "Now, everyone out.  No, you too, young
woman.  One of my nurses will stay with him."

Erileine was out the door and on the Hardeck's steps before she
realized that she had no idea what to do next.  Once again, she was on
her own in the biggest town on the mountain with a string of coins in
her pocket.  This time, though, the sky was dark, and her teacher was
unconscious with twenty-two fresh stitches in his side.  She supposed
she should go back to the Three Rabbits, but the thought of lying
alone in her room was unbearable.  Maybe he should go to Uncle Regi's
instead, if she could figure out how to get there.

"Well, then." Erileine turned as Thomas ambled down the steps.  "Quite
a day, wasn't it?"

"If you say so," Erileine said curtly.

Thomas smiled indulgently.  "Now, now.  There's really no need to
speak that way."

"He could have *died!*" The angry words were out of Erileine's mouth
before she knew he was going to say them.

Thomas nodded.  "Yes, he could have.  He could have died yesterday,
too, or the day before.  Would that have been my fault too?"

For a moment, all Erileine could do was gape like a fish out of water.
"You–you could have saved him if you wanted to!  You could have–" *You
could have grabbed his hand,* she'd been about to say.  *All you had
to do was reach out.*

Thomas sighed theatrically.  "It escapes me, truly, why supposedly
educated people believe that magicians can just snap their fingers and
set the world right.  Every spell I might have used would have cost me
far more than I was willing to give up, especially with so much
mundane help just a few steps away.  Rushing around and saving
people–that's not really what magicians do, you know.  That kind of
thing is better left to the booksters of this world."

"Did you tell his last apprentice that too?" Erileine asked bitterly.

Thomas smiled thinly.  "No.  No, what I told *him* was that if I ever
saw him again, I'd put his eyes out with my thumbs." He nodded
farewell politely and, whistling, went on his way.

Erileine's anger dissipated as quickly as it had come, leaving her
cold and tired.  She bought a sausage on a stick and a strip of flat
bread from a stall that stayed open for militiamen on the night watch,
and chewed them slowly as she walked back to the Three Rabbits.

The old woman at the Three Rabbits had already heard about Razi, but
seemed more worried about Erileine.  "I'm fine," she reassured her.
"But I hope my maere and paere hear the story straight.  I mean, if
someone tells them it was me instead of him…"

"Well, there's nothing anyone can do about that tonight, is there?"
the old woman said soothingly.  "Now, are you sure you aren't hungry?
There's plenty of beans left in the pot."

"I'm fine, thank you.  I think I'll just go to bed."

"All right.  Oh, but wait.  I almost forgot.  Your little friend left
this for you.  He said you dropped it in the market." The old woman
took a book from the mantelpiece and handed it to her.

Erileine blinked.  It was the collection of stories she had looked at
that afternoon.  "Thank you," she said automatically.  "Was it–who
dropped it off?"

The old woman raised an eyebrow.  "You don't know?"

Erileine shrugged, feeling embarrassed.  "I can guess," she lied,
"But, you know, I'd hate to get it wrong."

The old woman's smile turned up at the corners.  "Starboard Town must
be quite the place on holidays."

Erileine blinked.  "Excuse me?"

"Well, if everyone is as popular as you and the bosun…  I'd say he was
twelve or thirteen.  Could use some new clothes and a bath, but he had
very nice eyes."

Blushing, Erileine thanked her again and climbed the stairs to her
room.  The only light came from a sliver of dayglass beside the
window.  It was cheap stuff, so orange that it was almost red, and
didn't cast nearly enough to read by, but she sat on his bed with the
book open in her lap anyway.  It had to have been the thief.  But why
would he give her a book?  Unless he planned to tell the militia that
she had stolen it.  No, that didn't make any sense.  The old woman
would tell them where it had come from.

She riffled its pages, then turned it upside down and shook it.
Nothing.  Invisible ink?  Magic writing that would only show up when
the moon was full, or if the reader whistled the right song?

Defeated, she wrapped the book in her spare shirt and slipped it into
her satchel, then stripped down to her underclothes and slid her
skinny legs under the the quilt.  She would take the book back
tomorrow, right after she checked on Razi.  She closed her eyes and
tried not to think of the bookster lying on the dock, bleeding.  She
had just stood there.  He had needed her help, and she had just
*stood* there.

Sleep was a long time coming.

---

The old woman shook Erileine awake.  "What?  What?" Erileine demanded
muzzily.  The little piece of dayglass had long since gone dull, but
the old woman had a small brass lantern.  Lighting her face from
below, it made her look like a ghost out of a Bantangui puppet play.
"I think we're berthing!"  she said fearfully.  "Can't you hear it?"

"What?" The words made no sense to Erileine.  How could they be
berthing?  But suddenly the crackling sound she could hear wasn't a
fire in the hearth downstairs but a forest being crushed to kindling
by the mountain's underside.  A faint shudder ran through the house.
A moment later, thunder rumbled faintly in the distance.  Erileine
swallowed.  Had they just knocked the peak off one of the mountains
below?

She flung off her quilt and reached for her clothes.  "It woke me up,"
the old woman said, hugging herself inside the oversized ankle-length
coat that she was wearing over her thick white nightdress.  "I went
downstairs to see if it was someone trying to jemmy the door, but
there was no one there, and then everything started shaking.  What's
happening?"

*Why are you asking me?* Erileine thought resentfully, even though she
knew it was because she had no one else to ask.  "I don't know," she
said.  He pulled her right foot out of her left boot and took a deep
breath.  "Do you have someone you can be with?  Just in case?"

"There's my son-by-marriage," she said uncertainly.  "He's remarried
now, but he's just two streets away.  But he hates fuss–I don't want
to be a fuss."

Erileine almost laughed.  She was pretty sure this wouldn't be counted
as fussing.  "I'm sure he won't mind," she said, knotting her laces
and grabbing her satchel.  "But I have to get to the Hardeck."

She ran through the streets of Forecastle like a rabbit with a lynx on
its tail.  The streets seemed even more tangled in the dark.  Twice
she thought she had lost her way, but each time she came around a
corner and found herself exactly where she should have been.

Around her, guards with militia helmets in one hand and spears or bows
in the other hurried to their rallying stations.  People with coats or
blankets thrown over their nightclothes stood in doorways or looked
out of thrown-open shutters, yelling questions at each other, at
Erileine, at the mountain itself.

One last corner, and she was in the market square.  It was chaos.
Someone yelled, "Caeline!  Caeline!" over and over, looking for their
squad or perhaps a lost cat.  "Watch where you swing that!" a man in
striped summer trousers and heavy boots snarled as a clumsy
militiaman's spear nearly took his ear off.

"If you've got your gear, find the rest of your squad and form up!" a
bosun's mate bellowed.  "If you don't, then get it!  Hey, where do you
think you're going?"

"I'm the bookster's apprentice," Erileine panted.  "He's in the
infirmary.  I'm supposed to be with him." She started up the steps.

The bosun's mate blocked her.  "Get off with you."

A guardsman coming up the stairs behind Erileine caught her.  "Go easy
there," he cautioned the shover.  "We're not at war yet." He looked at
Erileine.  "I know you.  You were with what's his name, the fellow on
the boat."

Erileine nodded vigorously.  "In the infirmary.  I'm supposed to be
with him now."

The guardsman let go of her arm.  "Well then, get in there." He pushed
Erileine up the stairs, past the glowering mate.

Erileine raced to the infirmary, dodging clerks, mates, and household
staff as they all tried to organize one another.  She stopped at the
infirmary door to catch her breath, then pushed it open as gently as
she could.  "Bookster?" she said softly.

Razi lay motionless in bed, looking exactly as he had when Erileine
last saw him.  For a moment Erileine thought he was dead, that the
spells the captain's wife had used hadn't been enough, but then Razi's
fingers twitched.

"Bookster!" she whispered loudly.  "Are you awake?"

The bookster's eyes fluttered.  "Eimin?"

"Bookster?"

"*La*, Erileine…" Razi struggled to sit up, then let his head fall
back on his pillow.  "When is?"

"It's morning.  Almost, anyway.  You're in the infirmary, in the
Hardeck.  Bookster, we're berthing!"

The bookster closed his eyes again.  "And the sea shall give me over
to the land, constant and weighty," he whispered.

"Bookster, are you all right?" Erileine sat on the edge of her
teacher's sick bed, swallowing back the panic rising in her throat.
She hadn't thought any further than finding Razi.  He *had* to know
what to do.

The dark man chuckled weakly.  "*La*, I do not think that is the
phrase I would use.  Have you water?"

There was, a pitcher on the table where Nuu Ciy's bowl had been.
Erileine poured some into a heavy brown pottery mug and held it up
gingerly.

Razi sipped and made a face.  "There's poppy in this."

Erileine took it from him uncertainly.  "The captain's wife gave you
some last night.  Do you remember what happened?"

Razi sighed raggedly.  "Someone shot us.  Me.  From the trees." He
slid one hand down to his side under the quilt and winced.  "*La*…
She will be disappointed in me, you know.  I told her, yes, I promise,
I can do a little traveling without gathering any new scars." He tried
to chuckle.

The room trembled slightly.  Erileine clutched the bedframe wide-eyed.
"What was that?" Razi said, some of his usual sharpness in his voice.

"I think it was another mountaintop."

"Another…?  *Ye mashe aue*, we're berthing?" At Erileine's nod the
bookster tried once more to sit up.  Erileine rushed forward to help
him, but the bookster fell back again before he could.

"Go," Razi said.  "*La*, go, the magic window.  Find news.  I will
dress."

Erileine took the stairs to the Grand Hall three at a time.  They
shuddered beneath her.  A painting fell from the wall, missing her by
a handspan.  She tripped at the top, banging her knee painfully
against the floor, but hobbled on.

The Grand Hall was as full as the market square.  He squeezed between
two guards, ducked under a clerk's elbow, and found herself just
inches from the magic window.

"Brace yourselves," the captain barked.  The room shook as Avaunt
clipped another peak.  For a moment Erileine thought the red thread
running through the trees below them was lava, but it was just the
rising sun reflecting off a stream.

The scene below was like something out of the Pilots' war.  This
wasn't Gandan Berth or the jungle at Mau Ngapcha.  Avaunt hadn't
trimmed these trees every sixteen months for centuries.  These were
full grown, tall and proud, but still they bent under the force of the
mountain's bow wave just before being snapped in half.

A flock of frightened ducks burst upward from a pond as its surface
trembled.  The winged pigs that had been rooting in the muck at the
pond's edge took flight a moment later, and then the pond was gone.
Deer and gaur fled in panic side by side with chameleon bears, the
Gifted among them shouting panicked orders.  Nests and burrows were
crushed as Avaunt ground the earth beneath it.

Suddenly there was silence, as the mountain cleared a ridge and the
land momentarily dropped away beneath them.  "Look!" half a dozen
voices shouted needlessly.  There, nestled in a bowl-shaped valley,
lay Tinhead, its neat streets and tidy houses peaceful in the
dawnlight.

The captain swept his hand across the window.  The scene shimmered and
re-formed.  They were close enough now that they almost didn't need
magic to see, Erileine thought dazedly.  Another few moment and they
could have seen the soldiers with their own eyes.

And soldiers they clearly were, on the road that wound up the steep
hills standing guard behind the town, real soldiers with polished
steel helmets on their heads, heavy packs on their backs, and swords
at their sides.  Some had their shoulders against the rear ends of
carts, while others bawled silently at heavy-laden mules, but most
just marched.

The captain passed his hand over the window again.  There were more
carts further up the mountain, heavier ones, with four wheels instead
of two, piled high with furniture, chickens in coops, children, a very
pregnant woman, an elderly couple dressed in the same gray wool as
everyone else.  As the image swept by, Erileine saw one boy, as
pale-skinned as a Ruudian, jump up and point toward town.  The old man
sitting beside him on the cart's plank seat turned to look back at the
houses the mountain was about to crush.  *I hope you're as frightened
as we are,* Erileine thought grimly.

"Come on, where is it?" the captain growled.  Another pass, another
scene.  The gray tower they had seen the day before was now an
enormous prow of stone, twenty stories high.  The road from town
zigzagged beside it.  Three arched openings, each two stories tall and
broad enough to swallow a cart, broke its front face.  Heavy timbers
lay stacked in piles by each one.

The room rumbled again.  This time, the rumbling didn't stop.  The
mountain wasn't just clipping the tops of the hills any longer.  It
was down, grinding implacably toward Tinhead.

Without warning a house collapsed.  One wall of another gave way as
the town's two cobblestoned squares rippled like blankets being
shaken.

"Bosun!" the captain barked.  "Bosun!  Get the birds out!  And send
Jack, too.  Tell them we've berthed at Tinhead, and need help.  Tell
them!"

"Yes *sra*!" the bosun snapped, saluting.  "Tell who, *sra*?"

"Everyone!  Saints in dark places, it doesn't matter, just *send
them!*"

The bosun saluted, staggering and nearly falling as the floor shook
beneath him.  All around Erileine, people yelled at each other to stop
yelling, to make way, to stand back from the window in case it
shattered, it would be a hailstorm of knives if it did, saints, why
was this happening?  Why was this happening?

Sunlight glinted off the helmets of the soldiers waiting for them.
The tower wouldn't reach as high as Forecastle, Erileine realized.
Not even close.  When the mountain berthed, the openings would be face
to face with sheer cliffs.  Unless–

She squirmed around a shaven-headed clerk and tugged on the captain's
sleeve.  "*Sra*!  *Sra*!" she blurted.  "The tunnels!"

"What?" The captain looked down at her.  "What are you doing here?
Where's the bookster?"

"The tunnels!" Erileine shouted.  "That's what the tower is for.
They're going to go into the tunnels!"

The captain's gaze snapped back to the window.  "Bosun!" he bellowed.
"Where is the damned weeping bosun?" He grabbed a clerk's arm.  "Go
and find him!"

Erileine turned back to the window, clutching her satchel to her
chest.  Ten heartbeats, five…  The town disappeared below the window's
lower edge.  Erileine imagined he felt an especially hard bump as
Avaunt ground Tinhead into gravel.

Suddenly the mountain slowed.  Erileine was thrown forward against the
window, along with everyone else in the room.  Miraculously, it held.
She stood up, her face pressed against the glass.  The mountain had
stopped.  They had berthed.

---

Chaos ruled Forecastle.  Children and adults alike cried out in
terror.  Bosun's mates bawled for order as the militiamen in the
market square struggled back to their feet, tripping over one
another's spears.  Fallen lamps scattered shards of broken dayglass
like burning leaves.  People were thrown down stairs, losing teeth and
breaking arms.  Lintels cracked, roofs fell in, and a whole row of
warehouses on Butterjuggle Square collapsed.  Miraculously, both the
single old man asleep on guard and the young lovers who had snuck in
for some privacy walked away with nothing worse than scratches.

Rumors scampered around like rabbits.  The mountain had crushed an
entire town when it berthed.  Hundreds were dead, or none, or a
thousand vengeful Hett ghosts had come to eat everyone's souls.  The
magician Thomas had stolen the spell that kept the mountain flying,
and the captain wanted his head.

Amidst the confusion, Erileine jostled her way downstairs and ran
pell-mell back to the infirmary.  The bookster's face was drawn, but
he was sitting up.  He smiled when he saw his apprentice.  "*La*, once
again, history is being made around me, and all I want is a few quiet
moments with a night jar.  Please, help me up."

Erileine hurried to the bed.  Razi took hold of his apprentice's
shoulder and pulled himself to his feet.

"Are you sure you should be getting up?" Erileine asked anxiously.

The bookster pressed his free hand against his side.  "*La*, no, I am
most sure that I should not be.  But I will be all right unless the
good doctress finds out.  Now, help me upstairs"

They didn't even make it to the door before Nuu Ciy swept in like a
tiny, determined storm.  "Back to bed," she ordered sharply as she
threw open a cupboard and began piling bandages and bamboo splints in
the arms of her apprentices.

Razi straightened up.  "*La*, and miss the excitement?"

Nuu Ciy barely glanced at him, banging the cupboard door shut and
pulling open a drawer.  "All of them," she told her apprentices
brusquely, pointing at the knives and tongs that lay in polished
mahogany cases.  She turned back to the bookster.  "Now.  Or on my
blood, I'll give you a dose of poppy syrup that will keep you asleep
until the world melts away."

Razi nodded meekly in defeat.  "Come," he said to Erileine, shuffling
his feet as he turned around.  "Back to prison."

Erileine had to help Razi sit on the edge of the bed, then help him
again to lie flat.  "*La*, I am fine," the bookster winced.

"You don't *look* fine," Erileine said, secretly glad that the
captain's wife had caught them.  "Do you want some water?"

"Please.  *La*, wait." Razi shook his head.  "Not from the jug.  I
need my head clear.  Get it from over there.  You found us rooms?
Yes?  Well done.  Now, *la*, I must ask a small favor of you, and then
also a large one."

Erileine nodded, wiping the mug beside the bookster's bed with her
shirttail and re-filling it from the urn by the door.  "What do you
want?"

Razi swallowed a sip of water and coughed weakly.  "Goodness, that
hurts."  He rested the mug on his chest.  "There is a black leather
case with silver stitching in my pack, and a pair of candles.  And a
silver knife with a crystal handle.  Oh, and underclothes.  I really
should put on some clean underclothes."

Erileine hesitated.  "Are those your…your meditation candles?"

"You mean, am I going to cast a spell?" Razi shook his head.  "*La*, I
am afraid not.  Getting my things is just the small favor.  Using them
for me is the large one."

Erileine swallowed dryly.  "I'm not a magician."

Razi smiled weakly.  "Neither am I.  The spell is in the candles, and
in the picture that is in the case.  Lady Kembe paid their price when
she made them–you don't have to worry about your teeth falling out, or
having to stand on your head when you make water."

"I wasn't," Erileine lied.  "I just…" She shrugged.

Razi's eyes were tired but steady.  "She needs to know, Erileine.  She
can't help us if she doesn't know what has happened."

Erileine swallowed and nodded.  She had dreamed about being a
magician.  There wasn't a child in Cherne who hadn't.  When she was
little, she had imagined turning herself into a tiger or an elephant.
Later, she had daydreamed about having a giant's strength so that she
could settle the score with Fraederiq.  "What do I have to do?"  she
asked.

"Just light the candles and say some words.  That's all.  *La*, truly,
that's all." Razi closed his eyes.  Suddenly, surprisingly, he
chuckled.  "It's a pity I don't have anything to read.  This would be
a wonderful time to catch up."

Erileine slid his satchel off his shoulder, undid the drawstring, and
pulled out the collection of Praczny tales.  "How about this?" she
asked.

Razi took it from her flipped through the pages.  His eyebrows went
up.  "'Oh, Sieur Artan, the sun will burn out before I give my heart
to any man but you.'  Erileine, I would never have guessed your tastes
were so…purple."

Erileine felt her ears burning.  "It's for my maere and sister," she
mumbled.  "I thought I could read it to them.  For practice."

"*La*, yes, well…" Razi turned another page.  His eyebrows went up
even higher.  "You may want to read it through yourself before you do
so for them.  Some of the vocabulary is rather…advanced."

Erileine slipped out of the infirmary and hurried along the corridor.
None of the clerks and guards he passed took any notice of him.
Outside, half of the militia in the market square had managed to form
up, spearmen and archers side by side.  The rest were still milling
around, shouting for their companions or standing on tiptoe, waving to
be seen.  *They don't even have proper uniforms*, Erileine thought.
The spearmen wore vests and helmets of bootsole leather.  The soldiers
in Tinhead had all been in armor.

She shook his head.  Unshuttering the tiny hand lantern she'd taken
from the infirmary cupboard, she hurried back to the Sign of the Three
Rabbits.

It was locked.  Erileine thumped the inn's door drum over and over
again, but the old woman didn't appear.  She stepped back and looked
up at the little balcony.  If she could get up there, and if that door
wasn't locked…  But how?

"She went to stay with her son-by-marriage." Erileine whirled around
at the voice behind him.  The thief boy was standing a few strides
away in the mouth of the narrow alley that ran between the inn and the
house beside it.

"What are you doing here?" Erileine demanded.

The boy scowled.  "That's none of your business.  Now, do you want to
get in or not?"

Erileine opened her mouth to say 'no', and instead said, "Yes.  It's
really important.  The bookster needs his things."

The boy nodded.  "All right, I'll get them for you."

"Oh no you won't.  He told *me* to get them."

The boy crossed her arms.  "Fine.  Go ahead."

Erileine glowered at him.  "Look, just tell me where her
son-by-marriage lives, and I'll go get a key."

"Uh uh." He shook his head.

"I don't have time for this," Erileine muttered.  Without thinking,
she took a step toward the boy.  Instantly, he darted into the alley.

"Wait!" she shouted.  "Wait!  Come back!" She ran to the alley, but
the thief had vanished.

"Great," she muttered.  She was right back where she had started.  If
she put one of the big planters beside the front door on top of the
other and stood on that…  She still wouldn't be able to reach the
balcony.  And anyway, how was she going to move the planter?  It was
half as big as she was.  *Why can't people leave ladders lying around
like they do in stories?* she thought bitterly.

The balcony door opened above him.  The thief stepped out with Razi's
bag in his arms.  "Can you catch?" he asked.

---

The guards at the Hardeck's doors waved Erileine through.  Inside, the
confusion had ripened into a more purposeful kind of madness.
What-ifs had been replaced by orders given, clarified, countermanded,
and repeated.

The infirmary was as busy as a tavern on Departure Eve.  A pair of
nurses held a screaming clerk down while Nuu Ciy tried to get the
upper and lower halves of his shin to line up.  A woman with iron-gray
hair waited stoically on the next bed, the cloth she held over one eye
red and getting redder.

Amazingly, Razi was asleep, the book of Praczny stories open on his
chest.  Erileine set her teacher's bag on the floor and sat down
gingerly at the foot of the bed.  Razi's eyes opened.

"*La*, there you are." Razi yawned.  "Did you have any trouble?"

"Not really," Erileine said.  This didn't seem the right time to
explain how she had gotten the bag.  She had checked it, though, to
make sure everything was there.  When the boy protested, Erileine
said, "You told me yourself that you're a thief, remember?"

He had walked with her back to the Hardeck.  The closer they got to
the market square, the edgier he became, until he slipped away between
one step and the next.

Stiff and slow, Razi sat up, then stood.  "Quick," he whispered
loudly, using the bedpost to steady himself, "You distract the guards.
I'll make a shovel out of a feather and an eggshell, and we'll tunnel
our way to freedom."

"What?" Erileine blinked.  Had her teacher taken too much poppy tar?

Razi shook his head.  "*La*, never mind.  Let us escape while the
estimable doctress's attention is elsewhere, yes?"

In the confusion, 'escape' turned out to be no harder than walking out
the door.  The bookster picked up a dayglass lantern that someone had
left by the door, nodded regally at the guard hovering nearby, and
said, "Come along, then," over his shoulder to Erileine.  Just like
that, they were out in the corridor.

They found shelter in a narrow cubbyhole of an office.  The bookster
lowered himself creakily onto the stool behind the room's battered old
writing stand.

"Tie it closed," he ordered.  Piaerre fastened the door shut as Razi
opened his bag and took out a cylinder of black leather as long and as
thick as his forearm.  Silver stitching decorated both of its ends and
the seam on its side.  A wooden box came next, and then the knife.
Its short silver blade had a single edge.  Its handle was a piece of
crystal, worn smooth like a pebble in a mountain stream.

Erileine licked her lips.  All the scene needed was a skull with
glowing eyes, a black rat in a wicker cage, and a Gifted troll named
Ygor rubbing his hands together malevolently, and it could have been
put on stage.  "So, what do I do?"

The first step was to take a sketch of Lady Kembe out of the tube and
pin it to the wall.  The woman it showed was as bald as Razi,
round-faced and full-lipped, with shoulders like a longshoreman's and
a pair of fiery wings tattooed on her neck.  She was sitting at a
plain wooden desk; a neat row of books stood watch on a shelf behind
her head, and an elaborate curlicue grill covered the window next to
it.

"That is the writing room in her house in Ossisswe," Razi said,
shaking two brass tacks out of the case and passing them to Erileine.
"The spell only work if she is there.  Luckily, *la*, she usually is."

Next, the candle.  There were two in the box, one half the length of
the other.  Erileine set the shorter one on the floor in front of the
picture.  "Do you want me to find some matches?"

Razi shook his head.  "There's no need.  If she hears us, she will
light it herself.  Now, take the knife.  You need to put three drops
of blood on the wick of the candle."

Like most doors in the Hardeck, the one behind Erileine was padded
with a thick piece of felt.  It muffled the voices, footsteps, and
confusion outside, making the office so quiet that Erileine could hear
herself breathe.

"It only has to be a scratch," Razi said gently.  "You've done worse
falling out of trees."

"I know," Erileine said.  The knife was very sharp.  She would barely
feel it.  It was the idea…  She took a deep breath and pressed the
edge against her forearm, then slumped.  "I don't think I can.  I'm
sorry."

"*La*, it's all right." Razi raised his palms to his apprentice.
"Just put it down.  She probably isn't even there right now."

Erileine nodded jerkily, then surprised herself and the bookster both
by drawing the knife sharply across her forearm.  She gasped as dark
blood welled up, even though she barely felt the cut.

"What should I do with the knife?" she asked, staring a little
lightheadedly at the lengthening red streak on her arm.

"Dip the tip in the blood," Razi commanded.  "Now touch it to the
wick.  Good.  Again.  No, dip it, then touch the wick again–it has to
be three separate drops.  That's right.  Now, put the knife down on
the table.  If you look in my bag, you should find a roll of bandage."

Just as Erileine handed the roll of white cotton to Razi, a tiny flame
appeared on the candle wick, and a presence enter the room.  There was
no other way to describe it: Erileine *knew* another person was there.

She she looked over her shoulder at Lady Kembe's picture, the most
powerful magician in Cherne looked back at her quizzically.  "Who are
you?" she asked.  Her lips didn't move–the portrait hadn't come alive
as they sometimes did in stories–but Erileine heard her as clearly as
if she were standing a stride away.

She swallowed dryly.  "I'm Erileine, *sra*.  Erileine Saedanne é
Laeuc, of Starboard Town, on Avaunt.  I'm Bookster Razi's apprentice."

Somehow, the portrait frowned without any part of it moving.  "Where
is he?  Why not does he speak with myself himself?"  The candle flame
flickered in time with her words.

"He's here, *sra*." Erileine gestured, not knowing whether she could
see or not.  "He was bowshot.  Yesterday.  In Thomas's boat.  We
berthed at Tinhead an hour ago.  There were soldiers waiting for us.
I think they're going into the tunnels, but I don't know for sure."

"Hold, hold," Lady Kembe said.  "Begin you from the beginning.  My
Razi has been shot?"

The story of the day's events tumbled out in pieces.  The more
Erileine talked, the more clearly she saw Lady Kembe.  She was older
than Erileine had first thought, but gave the impression of great
strength.  Her *deel* was white instead of brown, and she had heavy
rings on all of her fingers.

By the time Erileine finished, those fingers were drumming on her
desk.  "You are certain they were truly men?" she demanded.  "Those
the soldiers whom you saw?"

"Yes, *sra*." The scent of the candle was making Erileine dizzy.

Lady Kembe frowned.  "This disquiets me.  Tell my Razi I will make
such inquiries as I may.  Tell him also that such voices as with whom
I would usually speak have fallen into quiet.  I will ask others, but
that will take some time and doing.  And should Thomas attempt any
more than to watch, my Razi is to let me know *immediately*.  That
braggart boy will peril us all if he is not soon kenneled." It didn't
sound like she would particularly mind being the one to kennel him.

"Yes, *sra*, I'll tell him." The room was swimming.  Erileine's head
snapped back.  How could she fall asleep at a time like this?  "'S
there an'thing else?"

Lady Kembe's expression softened slightly.  "No.  Tell my Razi that I
shall do my usual to mend him with such as he left here.  He is not to
allow himself more injury in that time, or I shall be very cross
indeed.  Now, darken the candle, and rest.  You have done your name
credit."

"Yes, *sra*," Erileine said faintly.  She almost toppled onto the
candle as she bent over to blow it out.

Lady Kembe's presence vanished.  Erileine's knees gave way.  Her
tongue felt like a slab of raw goat, and tasted almost as rank.  "Sit,
*la*, just sit," Razi told her.  "It will pass."

Erileine slid down to the floor.  The rich, sweet smell of the candle
was too much.  It was like her seventh naming day, when she snuck
downstairs and ate both of the blackberry pies her mother had baked
for her, then threw up in the field behind Mamaere Mayeule's.  The
whole room was going cross-eyed…

"Erileine.  Erileine!" Her eyes snapped open.  Razi held out a small
red bottle.  "Here, this may help.  That's it.  That's it.  No, not
all at once, just a sip, then some more.  *La*, and I will open the
window."

Erileine did as he was told.  The lemon-mint tang of whatever was in
the bottle helped.  So did the cold night air.  She filled her lungs
again and again.  Her stomach was still queasy, and arms and legs felt
like they were made of wet rags, but at least she wasn't going to
throw up.

"Better?" Razi asked.  Erileine nodded.  "*La*, it is quite something,
isn't it?  The first time Lady Kembe talked to me that way, my
kidnappers had to tie me onto my camel to stop me falling off
afterward."

"Too bad we don't have any camels," Erileine said.

"*La*, believe me, you are better off without them.  Now, give me your
arm, and tell me what she said."

Razi bandaged Erileine's cut as she recounted Lady Kembe's side of the
conversation.  He nodded when Erileine repeated Lady Kembe's comment
about the 'usual voices' having gone quiet.  "*La*, she thought that
might happen.  The gossipy little spirits who bring her news are
frightened, though they know not of what."

Erileine pulled her sleeve back down.  "Does she know what's going
on?"

"No.  She would tell us if she did.  She is not the kind to send
anyone into battle blindfolded.  *La*, don't look so worried, it is
just a figure of speech.  Now, let us see if sneaking back into bed is
as easy as sneaking out.  You need to sleep–we both of us do."

"Sure." Erileine didn't need convincing.  Her eyelids were so heavy…
"Wha' did she mean about mending you?"

Razi shrugged, seeming almost embarrassed.  "*La*, she will work a
spell to help me heal, is all."

"All the way from there?  Wow."

"*La*, well, I left some things behind to make it easier.  Don't worry
about that–you should sleep."

Erileine nodded, looking again at the sketch on the wall.  It was just
ink on linen once more.  "Should I put it away?"

Razi shook his head.  "*La*, no, I will do it.  Though I'm sure we
will need it again soon."

---

Erileine was asleep in the chair beside Razi's bed when the infirmary
door flew open.  The captain strode in with two guardsmen behind him.
"Is he awake?" he asked brusquely as Erileine stood up, grabbing for
the book of Praczny romances as it slid out of her lap.  Razi had been
right–some of the stories were definitely not for her family's ears.
But she did have several new words to investigate…

"*La*, he is now," Razi said, opening his eyes.  He sat up without any
apparent difficulty.  "How may I be of help?"

"The damn window won't show me what's in the tunnels," the captain
snapped.  "It's like trying to look up your own nose.  And your friend
Thomas and his boat have vanished.  Any chance Lady Kembe could do us
a turn?"

"*La*, I am sorry, but I have never heard of a spell for looking
inside a mountain.  Although I wouldn't be surprised if Lady Kembe had
one for looking up her nose.  She can be rather vain sometimes, and
since she can't use a mirror…" He settled his head back on his pillow.

"Hmph.  What about you?" the captain asked, turning to Erileine.

Erileine gulped.  "Me, *sra*?"

"It was your grandfather that did the bonescuttle, wasn't it?  That
Coriandi fellow?"

"Yes.  Yes, *sra*, it was."

The captain's unblinking gaze remind Erileine of the condors upstairs.
"Ever been in the tunnels yourself?"

Erileine shook her head vigorously.  "No, *sra*."

Just then heavy boots pounded on the stone floor.  The militiaman who
came through the door nearly tripped over his spear as he stopped and
saluted.  "Captain!" he gasped.  "The well.  On Scissormaker Street,
*sra*.  Phaelippe saw folk in it!  With helmets and swords and all!"

"Did he say how many?" The militiaman shook his head.

"Captain!  Where's the captain?" Another voice in the corridor.

"I'm in here, damn it!" the captain bellowed again.

More footsteps.  This time it was a clerk with a misbuttoned jacket.
"Lame Fish Stairs, *sra*," she said.  "Bosun said to tell you.  He
sent a couple of squads home to sleep, but somebody attacked them on
the way."

"What do you mean 'attacked'?  And who in the names of the failed
saints is 'somebody'?"

The clerk shook her head helplessly.  "Bosun didn't say, *sra*.  He's
headed there now with half of his men.  The rest are still out in the
square." She swallowed.  "Might be a good idea if you came, *sra*.  No
one knows what's going on."

"I don't weeping know what's going on either," the captain complained,
but he was already on his way out the door with his bodyguards behind
him.

As soon as they were gone, Razi threw back his quilt.  "You'll have to
help me with my sandals," he told Erileine crisply, sitting up and
swinging his long, skinny legs off the bed.  "*La*, now where
is–*ayah*." He braced one hand against the wall, blinked a few times,
and then reached for the green bottle with the sword-hilt cork that
stood waiting on the floor.

Erileine opened her mouth to say, "You're not supposed to be up," but
thought better of it.  "What can I do?" she asked instead.

The bookster took a deep breath.  "Find my sandals."

He moved stiffly as he buckled his belt carefully across his hips, so
that the heavy green bottle hung down from his side like a scabbard
once again.  "What is that?" Erileine asked.

"It was a present from Lady Kembe." Razi scrunched his toes to settle
his feet in his sandals.  "Good enough.  Now, everything else into my
bag."

Erileine hesitated, "Bookster?  What do you think is happening?"

His teacher smoothed his *deel*.  "The same thing you do.  I think the
mountain is being invaded."

The little office they had used the previous evening lay down the
corridor to their left, but Razi turned right instead.  He walked
slowly but purposefully, nodding at everyone they passed but never
breaking stride.

Erileine followed him into a narrow corridor that dead-ended at a
heavy wooden door.  Razi slipped a flat leather wallet out of his
sleeve.  Unfolded, it revealed half a dozen odd-shaped metal picks.  A
moment's work, and the door's lock clicked.  He waved Erileine through
and closed the door behind them.

Sharp-edged sunlight poured through a barred window high on the wall
opposite them.  Another sturdy wooden door, barely taller than
Erileine, stood beneath it.

"Phew!" Erileine wrinkled her nose.  The shelves on all sides of the
small room were lined with night jars waiting to be carted away.

"*La*, I'm sure some of it is yours," Razi said as he crossed to the
far wall and untied the door.  Outside lay a single worn gray step and
an alley barely wide enough for the two-wheeled cart that blocked it.
Razi cocked his head to one side, then glanced over his shoulder at
Erileine and smiled.  "What do you think?  Shall we take care of this
until the regular man comes back?"

Erileine scowled.  "I thought the whole point of becoming a bookster
was that I wouldn't have to shovel other people's–"

*Whoomp!* The sound of the explosion hit Erileine like a padded club.
Even as she staggered back, Razi grabbed her arm and dragged her into
the alley.  In the distance, people started screaming.

"What was that?  Bookster, what was that?"

"Quiet." Razi flattened himself against the wall, wincing.

"But–"

"*Quiet*," Razi hissed.  "It was banefire, *la*, what the Bantangui
called wizard's anger.  Now, stay behind me, and whatever you do, do
*not* drop Lady Kembe's things."

Razi edged forward on the balls of his feet.  He paused at the corner,
then glanced around it and pulled his head back in one quick motion,
like an irving thrusting its beak into a pine tree to snatch a grub.

"Over there," he mouthed to Erileine, pointing to the other side of
the alley.  Erileine tiptoed across.

From where she huddled against the wall, the alley's mouth was a
window onto hell.  The blast had blown a hole twenty strides across in
the market square.  Gobbets of red-orange fire sizzled among the
scattered bricks.  People ran back and forth, shouting and screaming,
some trying to help the wounded, others trying to rescue their wares,
and still others trying to knock down the stalls that were still
standing so that the fire wouldn't spread.  Militia spears lay
forgotten on the cobblestones as their owners beat the insolent flames
with their coats.  Erileine saw a bosun's mate grab a militiaman's arm
and yell an order.  The man shoved him away, knocking him off his
feet.

*Thomas!* Erileine suddenly thought.  Anger and fear churned in her
gut.  Was this the missing magician's work?  Had he been in league
with the soldiers in Tinhead the whole time?

Razi caught Erileine's eyes and shook his head.  "There's nothing you
can do," he said softly, misreading Erileine's thoughts.  "Now, *la*,
we must hurry, before they seal the town." He stepped into the street
and walked briskly away from the destruction.

Erileine's thoughts whirled.  What did he mean, seal the town?  And
shouldn't they be trying to help?  People were dying!  All of a sudden
she thought, *What about Starboard Town?* Was it under attack as well?
What was happening to his maere and paere, to Queçenne and Papaere
Vurt?

"Erileine!" She jumped.  "Now!"

Erileine hurried to match her master's pace.  Fifty strides up the
street they turned left into an alley that stank of cat.  Razi slipped
the latch on a gate, ignoring the honking of the irate gander tethered
next to it, and strode across a yard filled with half-finished benches
and chairs.

A sharp right turn brought them to another yard, filled like the first
with furniture in various stages of repair.  The pink roof tiles told
Erileine where they were: the steam baths.  She had been here with her
father the last time the mountain had berthed at Mau Ngapcha.

"You!  Stop there!" Erileine nearly jumped out of her skin.  Razi
turned around, his hand resting casually on his sword hilt.

A militiaman stepped out of his hiding place behind a half-finished
chest of drawers.  "Who are you?" he demanded, his arrow pointed
straight at Razi's chest.  Two more men stood up behind him, their
long spears held tightly.

Razi let go of his sword hilt and raised his palms.  "I am Razibendra
uy-Ossisswe, a bookster.  This is my apprentice, Erileine Saedanne é
Laeuc, from Starboard Town."

The militiaman's aim didn't waver.  "You the one they shot?"

Razi nodded.  "*La*, yes.  Am I about to be shot again?"

"Thinking about it.  What's happening back in the market?"

"It's burning.  The enemy has been seen on Scissormaker Street as
well."

"I told you," one of the spearmen muttered angrily.

The man with the bow ignored him.  "So you're just walking away from
it all?"

Razi shrugged helplessly.  "*La*, my wound is still fresh.  I thought
there would be people in greater need of the sick room this night than
me, so–"

The archer's eyes widened as the spearman beside him yelled, "Look
out!"  Razi grabbed Erileine's arm and threw her to the ground,
whirling in the same motion to face the half-dozen armored soldiers
who poured onto the street through the bath house doors, two holding
crossbows, the rest with swords in their hands.  "*Nas na forchem!  Na
forchem!*" the one in front yelled.

Maybe even then there was still a chance.  Maybe if the militia archer
hadn't been as good, or as lucky, as he was.  Maybe if the Avauntois
had spoken enough Praczny to understand that the Tinhead sergeant was
yelling, "Don't shoot them!" But then the militiaman's arrow snickered
over Erileine's head and took the sergeant in the throat, and whatever
chances had been in that little yard flew away like frightened birds.

*Whap!  Whap!* The Tinhead crossbows sounded like books being slammed
down on a table.  The quarrels knocked the Avauntois archer back
against the chest of drawers.

"Aaaaah!" the spearmen yelled.  They charged the invaders, two
frightened men who had just seen their best friend die against twice
their own number of swords.

Metal clanked against metal.  A spear clattered to the ground.  A
man's terrified cry for help was suddenly cut off.

"*Yeshed nausi pra tallein!*" Razi shouted.  "We take no side!"

That quickly, it was over.  Erileine scrambled to her feet, the
breakfast she hadn't eaten rising in her throat.  One spearman lay
dead just two strides away.  The other was thrashing on the
cobblestones, harsh animal sounds escaping from his throat as blood
spurted out of the gash in his thigh.  The two Tinhead crossbowmen had
braced their bows against their feet and were cranking the strings
back into place.

A soldier with blood on his sword gestured at Razi.  "*Nausi bayian?*"
he demanded.

"Stay behind me," Razi said, stepping in front of Erileine as the
Tinhead soldiers came toward them.  With a smooth flourish, he drew
his sword.

It came out of its bottle like silver syrup, shaping itself into a
sharp-edged whip of mercury.  As Razi lunged at the nearest soldier,
the blade lengthened and thinned to stab him through the shoulder from
three strides away.  Snapping it back, Razi stepped forward, turned,
and slashed a bowman.  Blood spurted from the arm he threw up to block
the blow.

The bookster lashed out again as the three swordsmen still on their
feet closed on him.  One got his sword up in time to parry a head cut.
The liquid blade rang on his like any other.  He jumped back to avoid
being disemboweled by Razi's backhand, tripped, and went down.

The second soldier swung wildly at Razi's head.  The bookster ducked
the blow and kicked the man's knee, cracking his sword like a whip
just thumbs from the third man's eyes.  "Run!" he shouted to Erileine.
"Run!"

But someone else was shouting, "Avaunt!  Avaunt!" A squad of militia
burst into the courtyard, spears down.  Razi cursed and threw himself
to the ground.  Arrows whicked through the air.  Erileine screamed in
terror as they thunked into an overturned table a handspan above her
head.

*Phweeet!* The Tinhead crossbowman who was still on his feet blew a
whistle.  Erileine scrambled over to Razi on her hands and knees.
"Are you–"

"Up," Razi gasped, digging his fingers into Erileine's shoulder.  His
blade had bunched into a blobby club.  He struggled to his feet, using
Erileine's shoulder like a drunk would use a handy tree, while swords
clanged and men shouted and died three strides away.  Together, the
bookster and his apprentice stumbled back the way they had come.

"Here," Razi said twenty strides later, pushing Erileine into a narrow
side alley and collapsing on the ground behind her.  They lay there
for a moment, Erileine panting with fear, Razi's breath rasping.  When
he took his hand away from his side and looked at it, he winced.

"Are you all right?" Erileine asked anxiously.

"No," Razi said weakly.  "I am not.  It has come open.  Where is the
inn?"

"I–I don't know.  I mean, I know from the Hardeck, but I don't know
where we are now."

Razi nodded.  "We will have to find somewhere else.  Help me up."
Holding Erileine's hand so tightly that it hurt, he somehow got back
on his feet and pushed his strange liquid sword back into the bottle
hanging from his belt.  The mercury rippled and gurgled back into its
strange sheath.

*Whoomp!* Erileine jumped as banefire rumbled behind them.  The
bookster's grip tightened on his shoulder.  "Sorry," Erileine said.
The early morning sky was a blinding-bright strip of blue over their
heads, but the alley around them was still dark.  It was probably
always dark, Erileine thought, as the damp cold around them crept
under her shirt.  She stumbled over a loose stone, again over a board
someone had thrown away, and a third time over something spongy whose
exact nature she didn't want to think about.  Razi gasped each time.
"Sorry," Erileine kept saying.  "Sorry."

Finally Razi squeezed her shoulder.  "Here," he said.  "I can't…" He
put his back against the wall and slid down it to sit on the bare
earth.

Erileine squatted on her heels beside him.  "What can I do?"  she
asked anxiously.  "Bookster, what should I do?" She hadn't realized
that she was crying.

"M'lady," Razi gasped.  "Ask her…"

"Razi?" Erileine shook the bookster's shoulder gently.  "Razi, wake
up!" Slowly, peacefully, the bookster toppled sideways.

"Razi!" Erileine pulled his collar open and felt for his pulse.  It
was as quick and as light as a feverish child's.

When she was eight, Erileine hiked down to Starboard Town's lower goat
pasture.  She wasn't supposed to–it was twice as far from town as the
upper pasture, at the end of a steep path, and there were places where
one bad stumble would mean a long slide down a steep, stony hill,
followed by an even longer drop–but Niquolas had joined Fraederiq in
taunting her that morning, and she had lost the toy dragon Papaere
Vurt had made for her out of a few scraps of leather, and she just
wanted to get as far away from everyone as he could.

She stayed in the pasture, watching the goats and muttering angrily at
the empty air, until her stomach started to rumble.  As she walked
back to town, she was so sunk in self-pity that she didn't see the
rabbit hole until her foot went into it.  "Ow, ow, ow!" She pulled her
foot out of the hole and tested her weight on it.  Pain shot up her
leg.

Erileine started to cry, but then, in a moment that stayed with her
the rest of his life, she stopped.  She wasn't crying because she was
hurt.  She was crying because she wanted someone to pick her up and
carry her home, but that wasn't going to happen.  Her maere and paere
would come looking for her if she wasn't back for dinner, but that was
hours away.  She stopped crying because it wasn't going to make a
difference.

So she picked herself up and started limping up the mountain, two
steps on her good foot, one quick, hopping step on the other.  It was
half an hour before Donaien and Armaend heard her shouts.  "Well,
you're a mess, aren't you?" Donaien said, trying to make a joke of it
while Armaend cut a length of elbow bamboo from a nearby stand to make
a crutch.

She never told anyone about her epiphany.  What would she have said?
But there in that alley, kneeling beside the limp, prone figure of her
teacher, that memory told her what she had to do.

The wooden box, the leather tube, and the knife were all in Razi's
bag.  She set the stub of the candle from the previous night on the
cobblestones.  Shaking Lady Kembe's portrait from its tube, she ran
her fingers along the wall until she found cracks she could jam pins
into.

And then, the knife.  She couldn't bring himself to cut the hard scab
that had formed over the previous cut, so she laid the blade beside it
and pulled.

One drop, two, three…  She touched them to the candle, praying that
she hadn't missed some vital step, then set it on top of Razi's bag,
crossed her legs, and waited.

Lady Kembe's picture studied him.  He couldn't imagine her smiling.
What if she wasn't in her room?  What if she was–

*Pop!* A tiny yellow flame appeared.  "Again, you?" Lady Kembe's eyes
narrowed.  "I did think my Razi was teaching you in books, not magic.
Where finds he himself?"

Once again, Erileine would have sworn she was there, even though her
portrait was still just a picture.  "He's bleeding again.  There was a
fight with some soldiers.  I know, I'm sorry, start at the beginning."
She took a deep breath and told the story as quickly as she could,
leaving out only the details that would later wake her up in the
middle of the night: the sound the militia archer's arrow had made
when it hit the Tinhead sergeant, the spearman writhing on the
pavement, trying to hold the wound in his leg closed, the scene in the
market.  "And now he won't wake up," she finished.  "He's bleeding
again and I can't wake him up."

Lady Kembe scowled.  "Have you his knife?" Erileine nodded.  "Good.
Rest a moment where you find yourself." The picture became just a
picture again, though the candle flame still burned.

*Whoomp!* Banefire thudded in the distance.  *I forgot to ask her
about Thomas,* Erileine thought.  All of a sudden she felt desperately
lonely.  What would she do if Razi died?  She couldn't just leave his
teacher's body lying in an alley–there were rats around.  She
shivered.  Did the Karabandi burn their dead?  Or bury them, like the
Gandan-o?  Did Razi have any oaths unaccomplished?  The thought of her
teacher returning as a ghost made her queasy.

And what was happening in Starboard Town?  Saints and small stones,
what was happening to everyone she cared about?  What was *going* to
happen to them?

Lady Kembe's picture came back to life.  "Well and then," she grunted,
setting a heavy iron bowl down on her desk.  "Have you there his
knife?"

Erileine picked up the crystal-handled blade.  "Yes, *sra*."

Lady Kembe took a neat stack of white bandages out of the bowl and set
them on the table.  Next came a knife identical to the one Erileine
was holding.  She closed her eyes, took a deep breath, and let it out
slowly.  "Well and then," she said without opening her eyes.  "Here is
what is needing done.  First, lie my Razi on his back.  Make certain
of his arm, that it is out of the way.  Yes, as so.  Good.  Now, open
his cloak.  No, there is in it a tie string which must be undone.  It
finds itself on the inside.  Higher.  Yes, there.  What?  Oh, his self
and his knots…  No matter, just you cut it.  Yes, with the knife.
Good.  Now open his cloak…  Oh my."

The wound was a thumb and a half long.  It gaped and closed in time
with the bookster's panting.  Crusts of old blood clung to it; more
oozed out as Erileine watched.

"Do you know the depth of it?  Well, we shall together discover that,
then.  Now, hold the knife over the candle.  Look at it carefully.  Is
there on it any blood?  Any dirt?  Any fish scales?  No?  Good.  Are
you wearing anything yellow?  Or can you hear any person singing?  Any
at all, even so faintly?  Take a moment, it is of the greatest
importance.  You are certain?  Good.  Now we are come to the hard
part."

She laid her left arm across the bowl, forearm up, and hefted the
knife.  "Have you the knife in your right hand?  Good.  Now, you must
put your other hand on the candle flame.  No, not yet, not yet.
Attend me." She opened her eyes and looked straight into Erileine's.
"The flame shall not cease with burning.  It shall hurt.  You must be
ready for that and you *must not* pull it away once we start.  Do you
understand?  The doing of it would probably kill you, and might fairly
leave me witless."

"I–I don't know if I can do that," Erileine said.

Lady Kembe scowled.  "He thought himself that you could and more.  He
has this much said to me the first day you spent with him."

Erileine swallowed and nodded jerkily.  "Good," Lady Kembe said.  She
squeezed her left hand into a fist, took another breath, and closed
her eyes.  "Put your hand over the flame."

Erileine hesitated.  "In haste," Lady Kembe said calmly.  "His death
has near found him.  It will have him for sure if you cannot do what
needs done."

Erileine looked at Razi's drawn face.  He couldn't cry for help the
way Fraederiq had.  *He wouldn't even if he could,* Erileine thought.
He would just look at Erileine, patient and understanding, waiting for
her to do the right thing, in nightmare after nightmare.

Erileine squashed her hand down on top of the candle.  The flame stung
like a wasp.  For a moment she thought that would be all, but then the
tiny yellow flame bit into her hand like a drill bit.  She clamped her
teeth together to stifle a scream, and only then realized that her
right arm had thrust the knife it was holding into the wound in Razi's
side.  She couldn't feel it at all–it was moving of its own volition,
probing the wound with the knife.

"Hold!" Lady Kembe snapped.  "Hold fast!" Erileine bit down on another
scream.  Saints, saints, saints, it hurt.  It hurt like nothing she
had ever imagined.  She dug her fingers into the candle.  *Don't let
go, don't let go,* she told herself over and over.  Tears ran down her
face.  *Don't let go…*

Her right hand swept the blade back and forth over the wound as if
spreading honey on a piece of bread.  The wound shrank, its sides
joining and sealing until it had turned into an angry red scar.  She
nearly fainted when her stomach rumbled at the odor of her own flesh
being roasted.

Without warning, her right arm went limp.  Whatever force had been
helping her hold the candle disappeared.  She clutched her hand to her
chest.  "I'm sorry," she moaned, rocking back and forth.  "I'm sorry,
I'm sorry…"

"Hush, child, hush, the thing is done." She opened her eyes.  The tiny
candle flame still lit the alley.  The iron bowl beneath Lady Kembe's
left arm was half full of blood.  The wound she had cut in her forearm
was exactly as long and as deep as the one in Razi's side had been.

She dropped her knife into the bowl with a clang and unfolded a
bandage on the table beside the bowl with her right hand.  "There,"
she said, laying her arm on the cloth and folding it over gash.  "That
should keep him whole for a time.  Now, show to me your hand."

Erileine opened her left hand and looked down at it.  Other than a
smudge of black soot, there wasn't a mark on it.  She flexed her
fingers.  Something felt odd…

"Hold it up as I may see it," Lady Kembe ordered.  Erileine raised it
and wiggled his fingers, realizing as she did so that she couldn't
feel them.

"Hm.  Not of the best, but not of the worst, either.  Some feeling
should return, if you are patient.  Now, how fares he our Razi?"

The bookster's pulse was slower, but stronger, and his breathing was
more like that of a sleeping man than a wounded goat.  "He's better.
What did you do?"

"Magic, of course," Lady Kembe replied shortly.  She unfolded a second
bandage on her table one-handed.  "You do understand the working of
it, I hope?  That you never have anything for free, but must rather
always pay for it." She unwrapped her arm, dropped the first
blood-soaked bandage into the bowl, and set her arm down on the
second.  "Your hand and my blood for my Razi's life." She glanced up
at her.  "I count it a bargain."

"Yes, *sra*," Erileine said.  She rapped his knuckles against the
ground.  Nothing–it was as if her hand was made of wood, like Papaere
Vurt's leg.

"Be you careful with that," Lady Kembe warned.  "It cannot feel, but
it is still of flesh as before.  You may easily injure it."

"Yes, *sra*," Erileine repeated.  "What do you want me to do now?"

"Wait.  That is all you can now do." She glanced out her window.  "It
is only just noon where you find yourself, is it?  He will sleep to
nightfall, or perhaps thereafter, and then be weak but able to walk.
He will find you somewhere to hide."

Erileine nodded miserably.  She felt light-headed and nauseous.
*Again*, she thought blearily.  It seemed to have been happening a lot
recently.  "'right," she mumbled, almost toppling sideways.

Lady Kembe's expression softened.  "Blow out the candle, child, and
sleep.  Make certain to keep yourself warm–you will else feel as badly
come evening as he does now.  And child–thank you.  You have been
brave this night."

Erileine nodded.  She didn't feel brave.  She felt like the world had
just used her as a night jar.

The candle flame disappeared.  Even as she thought, *I should put all
of this stuff away*, she rolled onto her side and fell into a deep,
dreamless sleep.

---

*Years later, a young Ruudian bookster named Leif Unruhsson decided to
make that night the subject of the formal debate the university
required of him.  He spoke with dozens of people, some for as long as
it takes to drink a polite cup of chai, others over the course of
several days.  He even tracked down Jack, the Gifted parrot, who by
then was living in comfortable retirement at the court of the Sad Duke
of Anyalcze.  Some of those conversations were quiet, almost
nostalgic; others quickly turned angry, or dissolved into tears.  The
bookster nodded and scribbled through them all, untouched by those
long-ago losses, until a draper with a patch over one eye undid the
top two buttons on her shirtcoat and drew out the small cloth bag that
hung around her neck.*

*Wordlessly, she loosened the bag's mouth and spilled its contents on
the rickety tea-shop table.  A porcelain doll's head; a puzzle piece
in the shape of a horse, its hindquarters blackened by fire; a simple
oval locket, the face and most of the gilt long gone.  "It'th all
tha'th left," she said quietly.  Whatever had ruined her eye had left
her jaw misshapen as well, unable to reach certain sounds.  She
pointed at them one by one.  "That wath my daughter'th.  That wath my
thon'th.  The fire killed them."*

*"And this one?" the bookster asked, tapping the locket gently with
the feathered end of his pen.  "Whose was that?"*

*The cobbler swept them into her bag and hung it around her neck
without answering.*

*"Sra?  Who did the locket belong to?"*

*"That wath mine.  I won it for thinging when I wath fifteen." Her
voice was steady.  "I wath going to teash my shildren to thing, but I
never got the shance."*

*Leif Unruhsson got very, very drunk that night, and spent most of the
next day sitting in front of the fireplace in the inn where he had
taken lodging, his notebooks in his lap.  He later wrote, "Twice I
made to throw them into the flames.  I asked myself, what use is
scholarship?  What use another dry recitation of kings and wizards,
wars and treaties, poems written and legends wrought?  That was when I
realized that what truly matters is not describing the world, but
fixing it."*

*That motto became the introduction to his debate, which the
university duly rejected.  "These are just stories," one examiner
wrote disdainfully.  Another scribbled, "Fireside chats with common
people do not merit a penny whistle, much less a scholar's collar and
sash," on the twelfth page, and read no further.*

*But others did, especially after Unruhsson died in a daring but
doomed attempt to steal enchanted weapons from the tomb of Janbinder
the Great.  The manuscript was copied and passed from hand to hand,
until three young firebrands in Vaarda (who were later hanged, eaten
by trolls, and married off to a respectable farming family
respectively) set it in type.  Lines Leif had written turned up in
ballads, were quoted by ambitious young councilors, were translated
into Karabandi and thence into Bantangui.  When Prince Thokmay of
Gandan stood before the Great Debate and said, "My lords, my ladies,
we are all Avauntois now," the assembly erupted with equal measures of
applause and abuse.*

*But that was later…*

---

The first thing Erileine thought when she woke up was, *I need a night
jar.* The second was, *Something stinks,* and the third, *Where am I?*

She opened her eyes.  She was lying in an alley.  The air was cold,
damp, and heavy with the smell of last week's apple cores and chicken
bones.  The mortar in the wall beside her had crumbled with age.  Moss
and yellow pinflowers grew in the gaps.

She sat up and rubbed her eyes.  The left one felt odd.  Suddenly she
looked around wildly.  Razi was gone.  So was Lady Kembe's picture.
This wasn't even the same alley!  And–

"Hello." She whirled around.  The thief was standing a few strides
away, his back against the wall, the book of Praczny romances in his
hands.  He closed it and cocked his head to the side.  "You're a
sight."

"Where am I?  Where's Razi?" Erileine asked, struggling to her feet.
Her vision swam.  Saints, but her head hurt.  And she was hungry–no,
starving.

"He went to find foot," the boy said.  "But there are soldiers
everywhere.  I'm supposed to watch you in case they come this way."

"What?" Erileine flexed her left hand.  It wasn't her *eye* that felt
strange…

The boy nodded at it.  "Is that from healing him?"

"Yeah."  Erileine flexed her fingers experimentally.  She could see
them moving, but couldn't feel a thing.  She tapped her palm with a
fingertip.  Nothing.  The meaty base of her thumb?  Nothing there,
either.  Her wrist?  Yes, she could feel that.  She made a fist and
squeezed so hard that her arm trembled.

"You did all right," the thief offered.  "He looked fine."

Erileine smiled weakly.  "To be honest, I would have preferred to let
Nuu Ciy take care of him.  Do you know where he went?"

The thief rolled his eyes.  "I *said*, he went to get something to
eat.  But there are soldiers everywhere.  Half the market burned down,
and they knocked the dock right off the mountain, and everybody is
supposed to stay indoors.  And they killed the bosun.  I saw his body.
And Allaere, and the glazer, and a whole house fell down on Unlikely
Street with people inside." He bunched his shoulders inside his
oversized jacket.  "Nobody knows what happened to the captain."

"What about the doctress?" Erileine asked, thinking about the magic
Nuu Ciy had worked on Razi, and about her hand.

The boy's mouth twisted.  He shrugged as if to say, it's no concern of
mine.

"What are you doing here, anyway?" Erileine asked.

The boy stiffened.  "What do you mean?"

"I mean, what are you doing here?  First Razi catches you stealing,
then you start following me around, then you steal that book, then you
break into the inn, and now you're–"

"And now he's making sure no soldiers find you.  *La*, which they
certainly will do if you don't keep your voice down."  Erileine spun
around.  A tired, unwashed, but very alive Razi held up a battered
brass pitcher and a handful of flatbread.  "Hungry?"

As the trio washed mouthfuls of stale bread down with warm water,
Erileine described what Lady Kembe had done.  Razi examined Erileine's
hand.  "*La*, it seems I owe you my life."

"More like you owe Lady Kembe," Erileine mumbled, gulping the last of
their meager meal.

"Oh, *la*, my life was hers already, many times over." Razi wiped his
hands on the hem of his *deel*.

The thief's eyes were as big as marbles.  "Lady Kembe was *here*?"

"No," Erileine and Razi said simultaneously, the first annoyed, the
second amused.  At the crestfallen look on the boy's face, Razi added,
"If she could be here, *la*, it would not be so quiet today, I promise
you."

"So what happened?" Erileine asked, dreading the answer.

Razi sighed.  "Forecastle has been taken.  If there is a window left
unbroken in the Hardeck, I didn't see it.  The Tinhead soldiers had
the militia pile their spears and bows in the square, then sent them
home.  The captain's guards, *la*, they are in the stock pens.  Or the
infirmary, or dead."

"What about Starboard Town?" Erileine asked anxiously.

"And the captain?" the thief asked.  "Do you know if he's all right?"

Razi shook his head in answer to them both.

"They're not just bandits, are they?" Erileine asked quietly.

Razi shook his head again.  "Bandits do not bring their children with
them.  Or their cattle.  And banefire, *la*, that is not such magic as
bandits would use."

Suddenly he raised his finger to his lips.  Footsteps–no, marching.
Heavy boots, coming closer.  A whistle blew, high-low-high, and was
answered by another.

Razi caught the thief's arm as he sprinted for the mouth of the alley
before Erileine had even digested what the sounds meant.  "Trap," the
bookster mouthed, not letting the boy go until he nodded.

The bookster laced his fingers together to make a stirrup.  Tucking
the Praczny storybook into his jacket, the thief stepped into it.
Smoothly, with no sign of the wound that had nearly killed him the day
before, Razi boosted him up to the window.  He opened the shutter and
slipped through.

The bookster gestured with his cupped hands at Erileine.  As Razi
lifted her, she grabbed the window ledge.  Her feet scrabbled
uselessly on the bricks for a moment before she got her weight through
the window and fell onto a warped plank floor crusted with ancient
bird cake.

As she rolled over, the thief tossed one end of a rope out the window.
The other end was already knotted around a beam.  Razi squirmed
through the window a few moments later and tossed it back.
Wordlessly, he untied the knot, coiled the rope, and stowed it in a
nondescript canvas satchel.  Shouldering the bag, he took a larger one
off the floor and handed it to Razi.

The bookster put the strap over his shoulder.  "Lead the way," he told
the thief.

They were in an old warehouse, Erileine discovered.  Pigeons, irvings,
and other birds had left years of cake on the floor.  The crates
stacked on the wall opposite the window were new, but everything else
looked and smelled as if it had been there for years.

"Rooftops are fine in stories," Razi said in a lecturing tone.  "But
it is hard to move quietly on tiles, and if anyone else is higher than
you, *la*, bows are not rare things in this world, and arrows are
difficult to outrun.  It is always better to move under cover."  As he
spoke, he drew a workman's knife from his bag and gouged the mortar
away from some of the bricks in the wall near the crates to reveal a
thick cord.  Grabbing hold of it, he braced his foot against the wall
and yanked sharply.  As the cord went taut it dislodged even more
mortar.  A final yank toppled a small section of wall inward for him
to catch and lower quietly to the floor.

"How are you going to close it up again?" the thief asked, admiring
the opening into the building next door as if it were a work of art.

"Why would I?" Razi asked.  He gestured for Erileine to squeeze
through the hole.  "I'd be a fool to ever come back here."

"But what about all the stuff in the crates?" the thief protested.

"It would just slow us down," Razi said.  "Right now, *la*, the most
important thing is to keep moving." He shooed the thief through the
hole and followed them on his hands and knees.

The second warehouse was as decrepit as the first.  A flight of stairs
and a weather-beaten door took them to a tinsmith's backyard forge.
The smithy's front door looked out onto the yard behind the steam
baths where Razi had fought the soldiers the day before.  Their
bodies, and those of the three Avauntois militiamen they had slain,
were gone.  Dark stains on the cobblestones were all that remained to
show Erileine that the fight had actually happened.

Razi halted, pressed himself against the wall, and glanced quickly
around the corner.  "Soldiers," he said quietly.

"There are some loose boards over the window to the pot mender's," the
thief said.  "Her downstairs has a delivery door on Sweet Icicle
Street.  It's only a couple of streets from there to the Rabbit."

Razi shook his head.  "We're not going to the Rabbit.  We're going
straight back to Starboard Town."

For the first time, the thief seemed unsure of himself.  "But…  What
if…" He left the question unfinished.

Razi put a hand on his shoulder.  "You can do nothing here.  *La*, nor
can I.  We can help most by making ourselves safe.  Besides, did you
not say that you wanted to see some more of the world?"

The thief wrinkled his nose.  "I didn't mean Starboard Town."

Razi smiled.  "*La*, well, it may be a better place to begin than you
think.  Come."

It took them half an hour to make a journey that would have been a
five-minute walk the day before.  Forecastle was deserted.  There were
no *bouquinnaires* selling grilled whole rabbits on skewers, no dyers
with indigo-stained arms lugging barrels to and fro, no children
spinning Bantangui tops or playing dance-with-your-mother on the
cobblestones.  The town's kites still flew, but the tramp of marching
feet and the shrill calls of the soldiers whistles were all around.

Razi never hurried.  When he moved, he moved quickly, darting from one
shadow to another, but he spent more time listening and waiting than
he did in motion.  Erileine felt a pang of jealousy the first time her
teacher held up a hand and made a series of quick signs that sent the
thief back the way they had just come.  The two clearly knew each
other.  But then why had Razi let the bosun arrest her?

The bookster squatted and duck-walked through a waist-high gap beneath
a broken wooden gate.  When Erileine followed, she found the bookster
pressed against the wall, his finger across his lips.

The gate stood at the top of a steep hill.  Below them, Tinhead
soldiers were marching from somewhere to somewhere else.  A few wore
bandages, or had fresh dents or scratches on their armor, but only a
few.

Erileine began counting.  Four…  eight…  At sixteen a quartet of
soldiers appeared with a sedan chair on their shoulders.  The man in
the chair wore the same gray uniform as the soldiers, but no armor or
helmet.  He sat upright, hands on the chair's padded arms, staring
straight ahead, swaying only slightly as the chair rocked back and
forth.  Sunlight glinted momentarily off his eyes, as if off metal,
and then he was gone.

Another dozen soldiers followed.  Razi waited until they were past,
then waited some more.  Erileine desperately wanted to straighten
up–almost as desperately as she wanted to empty her bladder–but he
waited until Razi signaled to keep moving.

They reached the pot mender's a few minutes later.  As Erileine
squeezed through the boarded-up window, something tugged at her.  She
looked down to find a long splinter embedded in the palm of her left
hand.  She yanked it out, watching blood well up with a curious sense
of detachment.

"Let me see that," Razi said, pulling a box out from under some rolls
of rotting canvas and a red jar out of the box.  Unscrewing its lid,
he scooped out two fingers of something that smelled like bad cheese.

"Like this," he said, smearing it over Erileine's left hand.  "Work it
in gently, like oiling leather."

"Will it make the feeling come back?" Erileine asked, massaging the
ointment into her numb skin.

Razi shook his head.  "*La*, no, nothing will do that.  But it will
stop your skin from going stiff and cracking."

Erileine wrinkled her nose at the smell.  "You have stuff just for
that?"

The bookster shrugged.  "Actually, it's for cows' udders in winter."

"Oh." Erileine digested that.  She looked around.  "So how many places
like this do you have?"

"In Forecastle?" Razi turned his hands palms-up.  "Just the two you
have seen."

"And in Starboard Town?"

The bookster closed his box and sat on its lid.  "That should be
enough.  Try to use it as much as you normally would, to keep it
strong."

Erileine let her hands fall to her sides.  She was hungry, and tired,
and frightened, and the way the thief had rolled his eyes at her
question was the last straw.  "Bookster–I said, do you have a cache
like this in Starboard Town too?"

Razi glanced at her.  "Not in, no, but near.  One takes precautions."

In the long, dark hours that followed, as she repeatedly squeezed and
relaxed her left hand in a vain attempt to take her mind off her empty
stomach, Erileine wondered what other precautions the bookster had
taken.  When she wasn't doing that, or worrying about her family, she
wondered who the invaders were and what they wanted with Avaunt.  The
spices in Forecastle's warehouses were worth several fortunes, but
like Razi had said, this wasn't just banditry.

The pot mender's shop smelled of clay and glue.  It wasn't much bigger
than Papaere Vurt's kitchen: a counter, some shelves, a small kiln,
and a stairway so steep that it might as well be called a ladder.  The
thief sat on the floor, slowly turning the pages of the book of
Praczny stories.  Erileine didn't know if he could read; even if he
could, there wasn't enough light for it, but he turned the pages
anyway.  Razi lay on his back near Erileine's feet, his arms behind
his head, breathing slowly and softly.

Suddenly Erileine could stand it no longer.  She stood up.  "We have
to get going."

"Two more hours," Razi said without moving.  "It will be dark then."

"But–"

"Two more hours," Razi repeated.  He turned his head to look at
Erileine.  Erileine sat disconsolately and listened to the pages
turning slowly behind the counter.

---

In the end, Razi had to wake Erileine from an uncomfortable doze.
"It's time," he said softly, shaking her shoulder.

The bookster's bag empty lay neatly folded on a shelf.  The tube
holding Lady Kembe's picture was slung over his shoulder on a cord.
The rest of his things were hidden in the depths of his *deel*, except
for the green sword bottle that hung from his belt and a coil of rope
that he wore over one shoulder and across his chest.

"All clear," the thief whispered loudly from the basement.

"After you.  *La*, and take care with your hand." Razi stepped back to
let Erileine go first down the steep, narrow steps.

The pot mender's shop had barely been large enough for the three of
them.  Its basement was even smaller.  The dust mice on the steps were
big enough to deserve individual names, and gray clumps of cobweb hung
in the corners.

Razi waited on the bottom stair behind Erileine while the thief
cracked the delivery door open.  He slipped through and then beckoned
them forward.

Sweet Icicle Street took its name from the shops at its upper end,
which Erileine could just make out in the gathering twilight.  Twice a
week, on Redsday and Greensday, Forecastle's icicleers climbed up the
shoulder of the mountain overlooking the city.  There, near the peak,
they scraped hard-packed snow into their buckets, packing it down
under layers of wood chips.  After sleeping for a few hours wrapped up
in goat-skin rugs to stay warm, they hiked back down to town, where
they added drops of lemon, blueberry juice, mango, and other
carefully-measured flavorings to the ice.

The icicleers were famous for their clannishness and contrariness.
You couldn't have a wedding in Forecastle without great tubs of
flavored ice–the icicleers would stand outside the banquet hall
banging on their buckets and shouting insults.  When people said, "It
was as quiet as Sweet Icicle Street," they were describing a shouting
match.

But that evening, the street truly was quiet.  With the mountain at
rest, there wasn't even a breeze, just the muffled bang of a shutter
being closed hastily a few houses away.  Someone had seen them.
*Probably several someones*, Erileine thought nervously.  She hoped
they were Avauntois.

The sharp-sweet tang of boiled blueberries filled her nostrils as she
followed Piaerre and Erileine into a narrow gap where one shop didn't
quite rub shoulders with the next.  The gap led to a small,
neatly-kept courtyard.  A bamboo lattice gate filled its opposite
site.  Beyond it, garden sheds watched over patches of vegetables
fenced with wicker and string to keep out rabbits, and beyond them
stood pine trees.  They were on the very outskirts of Forecastle.

Even as she realized that, Erileine heard boots on cobblestones.  She
hurried to take shelter with Razi and Piaerre behind some
sweet-smelling shrubs in terracotta pots.  Whistles called back and
forth around them.  Razi patted the air with his hand–keep still–and
crept silently to the gate.  Ignoring his signal, the thief followed
suit.  Stung, Erileine followed him.

"They're watching the road," the thief whispered, pointing at a
glimmer of light escaping from the tin shutter of a lantern hanging on
a tripod between two of the sheds.  Half a dozen soldiers stood beside
it, yellow light reflecting off their helmets.

"*La*, and if they're smart, they'll have a few more further down the
road, without lanterns," Razi muttered.  "My apologies–getting back to
Starboard Town may prove more difficult than I had thought."

"What about the beanfields behind Conemongers Street?" the thief
asked.  "We can crawl through the drainage ditches.  That'll get us to
the pine orchard."

Razi cocked an eyebrow at Erileine.  "I can do it," she whispered,
nettled that her teacher thought she was the weak link.

"*La*, I'm sure, but–hsst!" The bookster shooed Erileine and the thief
back from the gate.  Erileine caught a glimpse of a sedan chair
surrounded by a squad of soldiers, its straight-backed occupant
staring straight ahead.

A whistle blew, high and shrill.  "*Nettin ya!  Nettin ya!*" the man
in the sedan chair shouted, pointing at the gate.  They had been
found.

Razi didn't need to give the order–they ran, like rats scampering away
from a cat, back to the alley and away.  Panic tightened Erileine's
chest.  Razi's cache of equipment, the way he knew his way around
Forecastle's back streets and byways, even his friendship with the
thief–whether it was habit or Lady Kembe's premonitions, he had
clearly planned for the worst.  But as they ran out onto Sweet Icicle
Street, it was also clear that the bookster had run out of plans.

"Psst!  Over here!" Razi pulled up sharply, stumbling a step when
Erileine plowed into him, and again when the thief plowed into her.  A
dozen strides away, a hand beckoned through a door opened just a
crack.

They squeezed through.  The door closed behind them with a click.  Two
men, worried and angry, studied them by the light of a dayglass
lantern.

"*La*, please, cover it," Razi whispered urgently.  "They will be
following." The light disappeared.

For a moment, the only sound was their breathing, but then Erileine
heard the tramp of boots coming closer outside.  She swallowed and
closed her eyes as the soldiers marched past.

"One blue banana, two blue bananas…" Razi counted the time under his
breath.  At twenty, he let his breath out in a whoosh.  "Thank you.
And now, please, the light?"

The sunlight trapped in the dayglass flooded the room.  Their rescuers
were standing shoulder to shoulder in front of the shop's plank
counter.  Father and son, or uncle and nephew, they had the same
unruly black beards and wore the same determined expressions.

Razi raised his palms.  "We bring no hurt," he said.  "Just our thanks
for giving us refuge."

The older one nodded.  "You're that foreign fellow, aren't you?  The
one that got shot."

Razi bowed slightly.  "I am.  I am Razibendra uy-Ossisswe.  This is my
apprentice, Erileine Saedanne é Laeuc, of Starboard Town.  And
Piaerre, without whom I am sure we would be wearing fetters at this
moment."

Erileine glanced at the thief, belatedly realizing that she'd never
thought to ask his name.  "What?" the thief whispered belligerently.
Erileine just shook her head.

"You have any idea who these lot are?" the younger man asked.

Razi shook his head.  "*La*, no.  We spent the day hiding from them."

The older man grunted.  "Same here.  They came around first thing this
morning, telling everyone we're to stay indoors 'til they say
otherwise.  Couple of folk tried asking questions, but all they got
was ironmongery waved in their faces.  We been here since."

Razi nodded gravely.  "And what of the captain?  Has there been any
word?"

The older man shrugged.  "Aivenne–he has the shop next to us–he saw
some soldiers marching a couple of the captain's guard up False Eel
Street.  Looked bloodied up, all of them, so he figures there's still
some fighting going on."

"Not that fighting did us any good last night." The young man's hands
clenched into fits.  "You figure we'd have a chance if we took them
one by one?"

Razi shook his head.  "No.  Not just two of you.  What they did
yesterday, *la*, they are not just soldiers.  They have magicians with
them, powerful ones."

"Told you it was a stupid idea," the older man muttered.

As the younger man opened his mouth, Razi cleared his throat to
forestall whatever argument was about to be reawakened.  "But *la*,
you said you had spoken to your neighbor?  Aivenne?"

Still glaring at his older companion, the younger man said, "Yup.  The
walls here are pretty thin.  Hardly there at all sometimes, if you
know what I mean."

"Oh, you mean there's a hidden door," Piaerre said off-handedly.  "For
moving stuff around on tax day so the bosun won't find it."  He
crossed his arms at the glares from the two men.  "What?"

"Whatever the reason," Razi interrupted smoothly, "If we can make our
way to the end of the street without actually being *on* the street,
*la*, it would be a great help."

"And what then?" the younger man sneered.  "Off the mountain like
ticks off a dying camel?"

"Avaunt isn't dying." Erileine was as surprised as anyone to hear
herself speak.  "And we're not ticks.  We're going to Starboard Town.
We'll figure out what happens after that when we get there."

The two men exchanged looks.  Then, without a word being said, they
turned, took hold of a narrow set of shelves, and pulled them away
from the wall.  "Careful," the older one said, steadying a heavy glass
jar.  "Don't know when we'll get more of that."

Through the waist-high hole in the wall, a voice asked, "Huon?  Is
that you?"

"It's me.  Got some folk want to say hello." The older man waved the
trio through.

Aivenne, it turned out, was as nervously chattersome as Huon had been
gruff.  He had a small clay oven, the back of which hung on a
concealed hinge.  His neighbors, a husband and wife who needed a
moment to make themselves decent, used a pulley hanging from their
ceiling to raise the section of floor that covered a crawlspace into
the next shop.

Razi, Erileine, and Piaerre eventually reached the end of the chain of
hidden passages.  Some of the shops had been empty, but their
neighbors knew which screens to slide out of the way and which
floorboards to lift.  Everyone asked the same questions: Who were the
invaders?  What had the trio seen?  Was there any word of the captain?
Were people fighting back?  *Should* they be fighting back?  Each
time, Razi answered, "I don't know.  *La*, less than you.  None.  No.
No, not yet."

In the last shop, a woman with long white hair tied back in a club
wished them luck.  "Down the bottom of the garden," she said, pointing
through the slatted shutter she was about to open.  "Don't bother
trying the gate.  It hasn't opened since before my time."

"Thank you," Razi said, raising his palms.

The woman made a disgusted sound in the back of her throat.  "You can
thank me by braining one of them when you get a chance."

The garden took them to a street that doubled back twice before
curving around an outcropping of granite to a storage pond that had
almost run dry.  The beans on its far side were only ankle high, but
the ditch that ran between them took Erileine's leg up to the knee.
The bottom was squelchy with mud and rotting greenery.

"So now we crawl," Razi sighed.  Piaerre wrinkled his nose, but lay
flat and began wriggling.  Erileine followed suit, gagging the first
time her weight made a buried twig fling a palmful of mud into his
face.  He found himself wishing that Lady Kembe's spell had taken his
sense of smell rather than the feeling in his hand.

The far end of the ditch connected with a larger one built to carry
runoff to the carp pools.  Erileine cautiously raised her head.  A
yellow glow moved through the trees fifty strides to their left.

"Do we run for it?" the thief whispered.

Erileine looked over her shoulder at Razi.  The bookster nodded.  "We
run for it."

"*Hesht!  Hesht aue paratte!*" The shout from behind them was
punctuated by a shrill whistle.  A second whistle took up the call.

"Go!" Razi shouted, sprinting for the pines.  Bean plants caught at
Erileine's legs as she followed him, redoubling her speed as a
crossbow quarrel thunked into a tree behind her.

"This way," Razi hissed, plunging into the trees, bending branches out
of their way and releasing them slowly instead of letting them snap
back into place.  Erileine moved gingerly, testing the ground with
each step before putting her weight down.  She had hunted rabbits this
way since she was eight years old.  She had never expected to be the
one being hunted.

They reached a rectangular patch where the replanted trees were only
waist-high.  "Keep to the edge," Razi ordered.

Suddenly Piaerre grabbed Erileine's sleeve.  "Look!" he whispered,
pointing at the sky.

High above them, the *Presumption* slipped out from behind a cloud,
banked slightly, and disappeared behind another one.

"Do you think he's looking for us?" Erileine asked Razi.

Razi pursed his lips.  "No.  Not Thomas.  He will just be looking.
Come on."

It took them half an hour to reach the road.  They saw two squads of
soldiers, one marching purposefully away from Forecastle, the other
guarding a double handful of Avauntois.  The prisoners were sitting on
the ground with their hands tied behind their backs and gags in their
mouths.  One was sobbing quietly.

Eventually the neat rows of the pine orchard blended into unkempt wild
forest.  "Rest," Razi said, squatting on his heels.  His eyes were
very white in the moonlight.  "*La*, a few minutes, no more.  Then we
walk until morning." He looked at Piaerre.  "Can you keep watch?"

"Sure." He hesitated.  "What should I do if soldiers find us?"

"Surrender," Razi said.  He settled against a tree, and was instantly
asleep.

Erileine sat on the ground two strides away.  A root dug into her
backside.  She wriggled, then shuffled sideways to try to find a
softer spot.  Finally she gave up.  *At least it'll take my mind off
my hand*, she thought wearily.  The tingling in her wrist had turned
into an infuriating itch.

"Hoy," she said softly, trying to take her mind off her desire to
scratch.  "So what's your story?"

Staring into the darkness at the city that lay behind them, the thief
didn't answer.

"Suit yourself." Erileine picked up a twig and wrote her name in the
dirt, then wiped it away and closed her eyes.  Writing her name made
her think of Mamaere Mayeule, who taught the children of Starboard
Town their abracadabras.  She hoped the spry old woman was all right.
She and Papaere Vurt had been circling around one another for as long
as Erileine could remember.  "Just marry her and be done with it,"
Saedanne told Vurt time and again, but that only made him laugh.

*He'll fight*, Erileine thought bleakly.  Some people might not,
especially once they knew Forecastle had fallen, but Papaere Vurt
wouldn't care about that.  He'd fight.

Erileine looked down at the numb hand lying in her lap and wriggled
her fingers.  She had to make sure she kept her hand strong.  She'd
never be able to use it properly if she didn't, and if she couldn't
use it properly, she wouldn't be able to help her grandfather.

---

It took them a day and a half to reach Starboard Town–a day and a half
of not knowing what was happening there, or in Forecastle, or anywhere
else.  Razi kept them in the trees most of the time.  Whenever the
only way forward was to venture onto the road or grow wings, they
huddled beneath low-hanging branches and let the toothworms sting them
until the bookster was satisfied that no one else was watching too.

They were halfway to their destination when they heard chopping and
caught a whiff of smoke.  Cautiously, they edged forward to look.

Fifty strides below, a dozen soldiers were clearing brush from the
mouth of an old tunnel.  They worked with their helmets off, but kept
their breastplates on, and their swords and crossbows close to hand.
They spoke in monosyllables, intent on their labor.

As they watched, one of the soldiers drove his ax into a stump for
safekeeping and called out to his companions.  They set their axes and
saws aside to gather in three ragged lines in front of the first
speaker.  He spread his arms wide, then folded them across his chest
and bowed his head.  The men facing him imitated him.  As the sun
touched the western horizon, they began to recite in unison.

A chill ran up Erileine's back.  "What are they doing?" she whispered.
"Some kind of spell?"

"*La*, I think not," the bookster replied thoughtfully.  "I think they
are praying."

Erileine blinked.  "Like the Ruudians?" The invaders didn't *look*
Ruudian.  Their hair was dark, not blond or golden red, and their
skins weren't pale like those of the loudspoken iron traders who
visited Avaunt at Gandan Berth.

Razi nodded.  "Except the Ruudians do it when the sun comes up.
Interesting…"

"What's 'praying'?" Piaerre asked.

"Asking for help," Erileine explained in a whisper.  "Or guidance.  Or
to be excused if they've done something bad."

Piaerre frowned sceptically.  "Asking who?"

"The whole world, I guess," Erileine said.  The books she had read had
never been very clear about that.

The ceremony below them ended.  A few men took pans and a kettle from
their packs and started making dinner while the rest returned to
chopping.  Wordlessly, the trio slipped back into the forest and
continued on their way.

They slept in turns that night, and were moving again before dawn.
Mountain streams quieted their thirst, but the early berries they
stripped off the bushes weren't enough to ease the ache in Erileine's
stomach or the throbbing in her head.  She grit her teeth and told
herself that she wouldn't complain until Piaerre did.

An hour after sunrise, as they neared Starboard Town, Razi raised his
hand.  "*La*, do you smell?" Erileine sniffed the air.  Pine smoke,
and the faint, stomach-rumbling tang of food.

"More soldiers?" Piaerre asked.  His hair was one great tangled knot,
and he started shivering whenever they stopped for more than a few
moments, but he hadn't complained yet, not even when Erileine slipped
backward on an awkward climb and stepped on his head.

Razi shrugged.  "The easiest way to know is to look."

Slowly, carefully, they made their way through the trees.  As quiet as
they were, when they caught sight of the campfire, there was no one in
sight.

"*La*, not soldiers," Razi said, scuffing dirt onto the fire as he
scanned the trees around them.  "Perhaps some Hett.  They may not even
know the mountain has been invaded."

"Can you tell which way they went?" Piaerre asked.

"*La*, if we were in the desert, and I had sand to read, but not
here."

"There were three of them," Erileine said, tracing a path into the
trees with a pointing finger.  "The first one had a limp.  The second
one was left-handed, and was carrying most of their gear.  The third
one was younger–no more than twelve.  Oh, and the one with the limp?
He was blind in one eye, too."

Piaerre goggled at him.  Razi's eyebrows rose into the middle of his
forehead.  "Truly?"

Erileine shrugged, suddenly embarrassed.  "No, I was just making that
up.  Let's keep going."

Just then, something rustled in the bushes behind Razi.  The bookster
whipped out his sword as Piaerre grabbed Erileine's sleeve and pulled
her the other way.

"It's me, it's just me," a familiar voice said shakily.  Arms raised,
a battered-looking Vaszlav stepped into the clearing.

Razi poured his blade back into its bottle.  "*La*, and what is it
that has happened to you?  Is this Gaeston's doing?" The tinker's face
was bruised, and his clothes dirty and torn.  A rough splint bound
three fingers of his right hand together.

"No." The tinker seemed close to tears, whether from shame or
frustration or relief, Erileine couldn't tell.  "It was the Hett.  The
ones in the helmets."  He laughed without humor at their expressions.
"The newcomers.  They're all Hett."

His story tumbled out of him while Razi fashioned a fresh splint for
his hand.  He'd been camping by the little stream that marked the
half-way point between Forecastle and Starboard Town.  His family was
supposed to join him there, but they hadn't.  He didn't know where
they were.  He hoped they were all right.

Then the soldiers came out of the old tunnels.  They were Hett, no
doubt about that.  They all wore homestones, every single one of them.
"They asked me why I didn't have one," he said bitterly.  "I told them
I'd never seen the point.  That's when they started yelling at me."
Yelling had quickly turned to blows.  How dare he call himself Hett?
How dare he stand by while *real* Hett gave their lives to reclaim
their rightful home?  How dare he *collaborate* with the very people
who had stolen it from them?  The Great Work was beginning–whose side
was he going to be on?

"I said I didn't know anything about any great work," he finished.
"So they gave me one last kick in the backside and sent me on my way."

Razi tied a final knot in the splint on Vaszlav's hand.  "*La*, this
great work of theirs–did they say what it is?"

The tinker shrugged.  "Not to me."

The bookster nodded.  "And your family," he asked.  "Do you know where
they would have gone?"

"Maybe," Vaszlav replied, suddenly guarded.  "Why?"

Razi raised his palms in a desert shrug.  "*La*, I only ask.  We are
returning to Starboard Town.  You would be welcome to join us."

Vaszlav snorted.  "Why?  So I can have my other eye blackened?  No
thanks."  Standing, he nodded to Erileine.  "Say hello to your
papaere, will you?  He was always a decent fellow." With no more
goodbye than that, he turned and walked away.

---

The goats in the pasture above Starboard Town watched the trio pass
from the security of their fenced-in enclosure, as indifferent to the
invasion as they were to the fat gray clouds threatening rain
overhead.  Nothing seemed to have changed: kites still flew and smoke
still rose from chimneys.

"Is there any other way into town?" Razi asked.

Erileine shook her head.  "Not unless we can borrow Thomas's boat."

Razi smiled wryly.  "So the front door it shall be.  But *la*, let us
not bring too many gifts to the banquet." He handed Erileine the
leather case containing Lady Kembe's portrait, unslung his strange
sword, and beckoned to Piaerre.  "On my shoulders," he ordered.  "No,
standing, not sitting.  I'll steady you."

With a hand around each of her ankles, he slowly stood up.  Piaerre
grabbed a nearby branch to keep his balance.  "Good, now, do you see
the cleft in the tree, just above your head?  Yes?  Good.  Erileine,
pass me the case.  Can you wedge it in?  *La*, no, higher than that.
Don't be so gentle, it isn't silk.  Good.  Now my sword.  This you can
be gentle with–we're a thousand gallops and a hundred years away from
anyone who could make another like it."

The Starboard Town militia ambushed them a hundred strides later,
where the road snake around the remains of a long-ago landslide.
"Halt there!" Bosun Uyves bellowed.  Three archers rose out of the
bushes to their left, while the bosun and two spearmen stepped onto
the path in front of them.

"Erileine!" Laeuc dropped his spear and rushed forward.  Father and
daughter hugged one another.  "Oh, love, your mother's been so
worried."

The bosun waved at the archers to unstring their arrows.  "What in
five hells has been happening in Forecastle?" he demanded.  Then he
frowned at Piaerre.  "Do I know you?"

Erileine told their story quickly.  She left out Razi's magic sword
and Lady Kembe–those parts already seemed like a dream.  Even without
that, it sounded like a fairy tale: the destruction of Tinhead, the
banefire that had burned Forecastle market to the ground, and then,
their discovery that the invaders were Hett.

"Get away," the bosun scoffed.  "The Hett couldn't do something like
this.  They're not soldiers."

"*La*, these ones are," Razi replied.  "Good ones.  And their
magicians are even better."

The bosun spat into the bushes.  "Well then, I guess I owe Gaeston an
apology.  What about the captain?"

The bookster spread his hands.  "*La*, we do not know.  Taken, or
slain, or in hiding."

"Aye, that's what Jack said.  How long d'you think before they get
here?"

"I don't know," Razi said.  "But when they come, *la*, I do not think
there will be much you can do."

"That's our concern, thank you," the bosun replied brusquely.  "Now,
go get some rest.  And you, boy.  Stay out of trouble."

"Yes, *sra*." Piaerre muttered.

As the travellers turned to go, the bosun clapped Laeuc on the
shoulder.  "Best you go too, I suppose."

"Thanks, Uyves," Laeuc said, his arm still around Erileine's
shoulders.

"And Laeuc?  Next time, don't just drop your spear, all right?  Sets a
bad example."

"Yes, bosun."

Uyves took a big breath and let it out with a whoosh.  "All right, you
lot, back where you were.  From the sounds of things, the next folk
down this road won't be so friendly."

People working in the fields ran to meet them as they trudged down the
mountain.  Saedanne almost cracked Erileine's ribs hugging her, then
surprised herself and everyone else by hugging the bookster and
Piaerre as well.  Mamaere Mayeule took one look at Piaerre and dragged
him away.  "Have you *ever* had a bath?" Erileine heard her ask.  The
next thing she knew, she was home.  Her mother stripped her filthy
clothes off her as if she were a baby and sent her stumbling upstairs
to find fresh ones.

Vurt and Queçenne were waiting for her when she came downstairs, along
with a pot of reheated stew.  After hugging them, Erileine dropped
herself onto a stool and began gulping down mouthfuls of steaming
squash, talking around it as coherently as she could.  It burned her
lips, but she didn't care.

"Easy," her grandfather said, nodding a thank you to Saedanne as she
handed him a mug of tea.  "It'll come back up if you eat too quickly."

Erileine nodded, sucking air into her mouth to cool its contents as
her grandfather quickly filled her in on what had happened while she
had been away.  There had been a rockslide when the mountain
berthed–nobody had been hurt, but it had made kindling out of the
shearing shed above the goat pasture.  But a few house beams had
cracked or skewed, and some crockery had been broken, as had Mamaere
Mayeule's favorite dayglass lantern.

Papaere Vurt slid a folded piece of paper across the table to
Erileine.  "Niquolas wanted me to give this to you," he said gruffly.
"He and a couple of others–they decided they'd had enough.  Or maybe
they were planning to go walkabout when we got to Gandan Berth.
Anyway, they came down past my place, and he stopped in and…"  The old
man shrugged, clearly uncomfortable.

The writing was blocky and awkward.  "The coconuts are under the
boards in the drying shed I bet they really are worth a lot you will
see you can keep it all love Niq." He had signed it with an elaborate
curlicued 'N' that took up a quarter of the page.

Erileine folded it and tucked it into her pocket as her mother took
her bowl from the table.  "Papaere?  What are you going to do when the
soldiers come?"

Her mother was behind her, so she didn't see her freeze, but his
grandfather did.  "Don't know," Vurt said.  "Worry about that when
they get here."

Erileine yawned.  "I just wanted to say, whatever you do, I'll help.
I'm going to bed now."  She stood, endured another hug from her mother
without protest, let her grandfather hug her as well, trudged
upstairs, opened her door, and closed it without going in.

"Well?" her mother asked below.  Erileine could almost hear her cross
her arms.  "What *are* you going to do?"

"Depends," Vurt answered.

"On?"

"What these fellows want.  How long they plan on staying.  How nasty
they are.  How many others do more than just talk." Vurt cleared his
throat.  "Could be none of them do, you know.  Could be this story's
already over."

"Somebody will do something," Saedanne said bitterly.  "Somebody
always does."

As quietly as she could, Erileine opened her door once more, lay down
on her bed, and was instantly asleep.

---

As Starboard Town's last morning of freedom dawned, the bosun was
downing a mug of the strongest tea he had ever had.  He and Vurt were
sitting behind Mamaere Mayeule's, looking at the unmoving forest that
was beside the mountain instead of below it, their fleece jackets open
to let the morning sun warm their chests.

"A couple of hours, I guess," Vurt finally said, setting his mug down.
Mayeule was inside, working her own brand of magic with garlic
sausages, dried apricots, eggs, and potato bread.  "Want me to get
started?"

The bosun nodded heavily.  "Yup." He stood up as Mayeule came out with
the teapot.  "Oh, no thank you.  That last will keep me going all
day." He ducked his head to her, as if he was still a ten-year-old
struggling with his letters in the hopes of getting a smile from the
teacher, and left them alone.

"He wants you to rig the traps on your ladder?" she asked Vurt.

He nodded.  "Quick as I can.  Just in case." Then he frowned.  "Didn't
know you knew about that."

She squeezed his hand.  "Whole town knows about it."

The corner of his mouth ticked up.  "I'd best be about it, then."

She squeezed his hand.  "Best had."

Up in the beanfields, the clouds had moved on without raining, leaving
the air close and oppressive.  People worked in the fields, or sat on
stools outside their front doors mending shirts and plaiting bamboo
and spoke in low, hushed voices, as if waiting for news from a death
bed.

Finally Gaeston exploded.  "Everyone's acting like it's all over!" He
was ankle deep in wet soil, a hoe in his hand.  His spear leaned
against the terrace wall two strides away.  "This is our home!  Are we
just going to lie down and let them take it?"

"So what're you going to do?" Laeuc asked.

"I don't know." Gaeston waved his arm.  "Ambush them.  Take the sons
of chocolate merchants one at a time, even things up a little."

A few strides away, Matthieu clutched a half-full bucket of weeds and
watched the argument with growing concern.  "Wh-what are they?  Mad
about?" he asked plaintively.

"Nothing," Queçenne said beside him.  It was her turn to look after
Matthieu.  She had pleaded with her mother to have someone else do it,
but Saedanne had said in her don't-even-start voice that it would do
Queçenne good to pick herself up and get back to things.

"B-but–" Matthieu started.

"I said *never mind*!"  Queçenne snapped.  "Saints, could you
just–oh. Oh, no, I'm sorry."  She got to her feet and put her arms
around him as he started to cry.

"I'm scared," Matthieu said, child's eyes in a grown man's face,
child's fear in a grown man's voice.

"Sh, sh, it's all right," Queçenne said, hugging him.  "I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.  I shouldn't have said that.  It's just–I'm scared too.  We
all are."

And then shouts came from the terraces above them.  "They're here!
They're here!"

The soldiers marched into Starboard Town in two columns, their helmets
gleaming in the sun.  Each man wore a steel breastplate, and had a
short steel sword belted around his waist.  They were clean-shaven and
unremarkable: brown-skinned, dark-eyed, neither tall nor short.  Their
heavy boots made a *tramp, tramp, tramp* Starboard Town had never
heard before.

Bosun Uyves and five others walked in their midst, their hands tied
behind them.  They were joined in pairs by ropes tied around their
necks, so that if one tried to run, or fell, he would drag his partner
down with him.

As they approached the upper fields, some people ran for town.  Others
just watched, their hearts echoing the shame and anger written on the
bosun's face.  There would be no battle for Starboard Town.

Laeuc lay his hoe down on top of his earthing bucket and hopped over
the fence into the neighboring field.  "What are you planning to do
with that?" he asked conversationally.

Alone among the Avauntois, Gaeston had picked up his spear.  He shook
his head wordlessly at his friend's question.  "Come on, put it down,"
Laeuc said.  "Not here, not now, there's nothing you can do.  Come on,
put it down." Gently, as if coaxing a sick goat into a pen, Laeuc took
the weapon from Gaeston's hands and dropped it in the furrow at his
feet.  That done, he clasped his hands together behind his back,
squeezing them to stop them shaking.

"Erileine?"  Saedanne pounded on her daughter's door.  "Erileine, the
soldiers are here!"

Erileine sat up and dug sticky grit out of the corners of her eyes.
"Where's Razi?  And Piaerre–the boy who came with us?"

"He's at Mayeule's.  I don't know where Razi is.  Maybe you should
just stay here for now."

"I can't, maere.  I have to find Razi." She pulled her good shirt on
awkwardly, then fumbled with the buttons on her pants.  It was hard to
do small things when she couldn't feel half her fingers.

"Hold on." Saedanne crossed to her, scowling when she tried to block
her mother's hands.  "Oh, stop fussing.  I've changed your diaper, I
can do up your pants." She fastened the three buttons and tugged the
laces on her shirt tight.

"Where did paere put my boots?" she asked.

"I don't know." Saedanne followed her down the stairs.  "Erileine,
where are you going?"

"I told you, I have to find Razi.  He's the only one who speaks enough
Praczny to talk to them." She veered into the kitchen.  "Is there any
bread left?"

"Just the heel.  Take it.  I'll make some more later." *If I can*, she
added mentally.

The light outside dazzled her for a moment.  She bit a mouthful off
the lump of bread she had taken and shoved the rest into her pocket.
Here and there on the street, people peered out from behind half-open
doors.  "Go back inside!" Donaien hissed from the other side of the
street.  "The soldiers are here!"

"I know." Erileine hurried up the street to Mayeule's.

Razi wasn't there.  Neither were Mayeule or Piaerre.  "Hello?" she
called.  Her voice echoed slightly in the main room.  She shivered.
She felt like a ghost, alone after death in a world empty of everyone
except her.  She opened the door, stepped out, and ran straight into a
soldier's armored chest.

"Ooph!" Erileine stumbled back a step.  The soldier eyed her coldly.
"Go home," she said in badly-accented Avauntois.

Erileine spread her hands and tried to smile despite her thudding
heart.  "I'm sorry, but I'm looking for my teacher.  I have to–"

"Go home!" the soldier repeated, waving Erileine back down the street.

Erileine swallowed hard.  "*Inesh Praczny pertakken.*" She hoped that
was right.  "I speak a little Praczny."

The soldier's eyes narrowed.  "*Pertakka arapche be keprelaptekete
arjo?*"

"Um, *ve nesse arja me.*" Erileine shrugged.  "My teacher speaks it
better, though.  I'm trying to find him.  My…  teacher…" she repeated
slowly.  "*Saad*, what's the word for teacher?"

The soldier whistled sharply through his teeth, two quick notes high
and low.

"*Hara?*" A second soldier walked over to join them.

The first soldier saluted and pointed at Erileine.  "*Arap be Praczny
pertakken in pidje.*"

The newcomer nodded.  "Yes, I know." It was Jaromir.

A black eye, a scab on the bridge of his nose, and two stitches in his
upper lip contrasted with his spotless plain gray uniform.  Two silver
ribbons sewn around its right sleeve were all that distinguished him
from the other soldiers nearby.  He nodded to Erileine.  "Good
morning."

Erileine's mouth worked for a moment.  "What are *you* doing here?"

The Hett waited a moment, then quietly said, "Please, finish your
sentence."

"What?"

Jaromir tsk'd.  "I think you meant to say, what are you doing here,
**sra**.  Didn't you?"

Erileine stared at him.  *Sra*?  Nobody called a Hett "*sra*", not
unless they were mocking drunk.  But Jaromir plainly wasn't just a
Hett any more.  He was a man with a uniform and a sword, and his stony
look showed what he thought of Erileine's silence.

"Yes, *sra*." Erileine switched back to Praczny, thinking furiously to
construct her next sentence.  "I is–am–apprentice for language.  Trade
also.  I learn Praczny, Gandan-o, read and write, Bantangui also, then
Ruudian also."

Jaromir grunted.  "Good.  So where's your teacher?"

"*La*, I am here, honored *sra*."

Erileine felt a flash of spiteful satisfaction as Jaromir started and
spun around.  The bookster closed the gate to Mamaere Mayeule's back
yard behind him and bowed gracefully.  He gave no sign that he had
slept rough the last two nights, or that he had been close to death
before that.

"Bookster." Jaromir nodded a stiff reply to Razi's bow.  "I am glad to
see you well.  Some very important people have been worried about
you."

The bookster raised his eyebrows.  "*La*, I am honored.  I wasn't
aware that any important people even knew of me."

Once again, Jaromir tsk'd.  "Please, bookster, no fencing.  There
aren't very many Karabandi on the mountain, and only one who might
have a quicksilver sword." He held out his hand.  "I apologize, but I
must take it from you."

Razi raised his palms apologetically.  "*La*, captain, I have no such
sword.  Truly."

The corner of Jaromir's mouth twitched.  He lowered his hand.  "It's
lieutenant, bookster, not captain.  A captain would have three
ribbons.  But I'm sure you know that.  Just as you know that if your
mistress were not who she is, I'd have your back broken here and now
for what you did to my comrades."

Erileine held her breath as Razi lowered his hands as well.  "I have
no mistress, lieutenant.  And I swear by my blood, I do not think I
have done anything recently to merit a broken back."

One of the soldiers behind him said something in Praczny too quickly
for Erileine to follow.  Jaromir shook his head.  "*Nesh*.  We have
orders.  For which *you* should be grateful," he added to Razi, his
tone level once again.  "We are to send foreigners to Hepje Het as
soon as possible for disembarking.  Sergeant Burak here will help you
collect your things." He jerked a thumb at the soldier who had spoken.

"Ah." Razi raised his eyebrows.  "And who, if it is permitted to ask,
is Hepje Het?"

Jaromir–Lieutenant Jaromir, Erileine corrected himself–smiled faintly.
"Not who, where.  Hepje Het is the big town forward." He waved a hand
to take in the houses around them.  "This is Anapje Het."

Razi blinked.  "*La*, truly?  I have heard it called Starboard Town."
He gave the name in Avauntois.

The lieutenant shook his head.  "No.  It is Anapje Het.  What these
people called it no longer matters."

"*La*, truly?" Razi repeated softly.

"Truly.  None of this matters any more." Lieutenant Jaromir waved a
hand to take in Starboard Town, the mountain, and possibly the whole
world.

Whatever reply bookster might have given was cut off by a sharp
three-tone whistle.  The small knot of soldiers behind Lieutenant
Jaromir instantly drew their swords.  "*Hurtiyet!*" someone shouted,
"Catch him!"  Erileine whirled around, crying out as Razi pulled her
out of the way.

Bosun Uyves's escape was short-lived.  Roaring like bulls, he and
Gaeston's half-brother Marq slammed into the first soldier, knocking
him to the ground.  They somehow managed to keep their feet for a few
more steps before the getting tangled in the rope that tied them
together and tumbling to the cobblestones.

The Hett soldiers kept their swords drawn as Lieutenant Jaromir walked
over to them.  He barked a question in rapid Praczny.  One of the
soldiers who had been guarding the Avauntois straightened up and
slapped his open left hand against his breastplate.  "*Sho!*"

"*Idjen cakhuisa*," Jaromir said.  Shamefaced, the soldier saluted
again.

"So…" Jaromir said, looking down at the bosun.  "Where did you think
you were going?  Or was your plan simply to knock us off the mountain
one by one?"

The bosun let fly with a stream of curses.  "Maggoty goat-fondling
lackwit cake-eating…"

Jaromir drew his sword and placed its point against the bosun's
throat.  "I want you to understand something," he said as the bosun's
words stopped in his throat.  "We are not animals.  None of us–*none*
of us–will ever do to you what people like you have done to the Hett
for hundreds of years.  It would be an insult to everything we
believe."

"But you need to understand, right in your gut, that things have
changed." He clenched a fist in front of his belly for emphasis as he
spoke.  "We govern here now, not you, and we will not swallow abuse or
disobedience any more than you did.  We would give our lives for the
Great Work.  We will certainly give yours if we have to."

He straightened up, eyes still on the fallen bosun.  "Bookster!  Get
your things.  Sergeant Burak!"

"*Sho!*"

"*In Hepje Het zaue buikken apchala erregan.  Immet na perressagern,
nesh karpe abj terteperressagern.*"

"*Sho!*" The sergeant slapped his breastplate and nodded curtly at the
bookster.

Without turning his head, Lieutenant Jaromir said, "Translate what I
just said."

Erileine hesitated, glancing at the bookster.  Razi nodded.  Erileine
cleared her throat.  "Go with the bookster to…  to Hepje Het.  Take
the passages–"

"The tunnels," the lieutenant corrected.

"The tunnels, but not the–I don't know the last word."

"The deep tunnels," Razi supplied.  "Or 'major'.  It's the same word.
It could even be 'the fundamental tunnels', although–" He cut himself
off, smiling.  "My apologies.  Once a teacher, always a teacher.
Erileine?" The bookster raised his hands, palms forward, and inclined
his head gravely.  "Please give my regards to your parents, and my
thanks.  You have been a good student." With no more than that, he
gathered his *deel* around him and strode away.  Sergeant Burak and
two others hurried after him.

Erileine stared at the bookster's retreating back, bewildered.  That
was it?  He was just leaving?  No, it couldn't be.  Razi had to have a
plan.

"I wouldn't hope for salvation from that quarter." Lieutenant Jaromir
said, as if he had read Erileine's thoughts.  But no, the Hett was
speaking to Uyves, and was also watching the bookster walk away.
"Lady Kembe is every bit as powerful as the stories say, but she is
just one woman, and very far away.  She will feel us out, and send
spies, and ask herself, what should I do, but then the Bantangui will
stir up trouble again, or the Sad Duke will open his mouth when he
shouldn't, and this will all become something that has already
happened.  In ten years, people will have to be reminded that it has
been ten years."

---

"Where in the saints' names have you been?" Laeuc demanded when
Erileine finally arrived home.  The whole family was at the table,
with Mamaere Mayeule and Piaerre sharing a stool somewhat precariously
at one end.  The young thief was wearing a plain brown overshirt and
black pants two sizes too big for him.  His hair hung down in braids
on either side of his face, which was clean for the first time since
Erileine had met him.

"I have a new job," she said tiredly, leaning against the wall.  She
sniffed the air.  "Is there any dinner left?"

"What kind of job?" Laeuc asked.

Erileine shrugged resignedly.  "I'm Lieutenant Jaromir's translator."

The stunned silence that followed was everything Erileine had expected
it would be.  "His translator?"  her mother spluttered.  "I'll be a
haunt before you'll be his anything!"

"I don't think I have a choice, maere.  Thanks, papaere." Erileine
took the plate of grilled squash he passed her and began forking it
into her mouth.

"Of course you have a choice!  Laeuc, she can't–what will people
think?"

Laeuc patted the air.  "Hold on, love, let her speak.  Erileine, what
exactly do they want you to do?"

"It doesn't matter what they want her to do!" Saedanne exploded.  "No
daughter of mine is going to have anything to do with those–those
*animals*!"

"What do they want you to do?" Papaere Vurt asked.

Erileine swallowed.  "Translate.  Jaromir doesn't need me himself–he
speaks Gandan-o as well as I do.  But most of the others don't, so I
have to talk to people for them.  He said I'll be a Local Assistant
Specialist, Second Grade, so I'll get twenty pence for each day I
work, and Purplesday off, except in emergencies."

"You're not going to take a single bent penny from them," Saedanne
said fiercely.

"I don't think I have a choice," Erileine repeated.

"What about the bosun?" Papaere Vurt asked.  "What did they do to
him?"

"They asked him a lot of questions," Erileine blew on the next piece
of squash to cool it.  After wracking her brain for three hours to
conjugate Praczny verbs, what she really wanted was mint tea with lots
of sugar and something inconsequential to read.

But everyone was looking at her, so she laid her fork on her plate and
collected her thoughts.  "Jaromir wanted to know all kinds of things.
How many bushels of squash did we grow each year?  Who used the old
tunnels as cellars?  Who drank too much, who got into fights, had
anyone ever been a *penteche*, all kinds of things."

"A what?" Laeuc asked.

"A *penteche*.  It's a soldier who fights for whoever will pay him."

"A mercenary," Papaere Vurt translated.  "He wanted to know if anyone
knew how to fight for real."

The silence that followed was broken only by the purring of the cat in
Mamaere Mayeule's lap.  Laeuc looked troubled, Queçenne looked
miserable, Saedanne looked angry, and Mayeule and Vurt looked at each
other, both thinking how unfairly short life was.

"What about the captain?" Piaerre asked.  "Did anyone say anything
about him?"

Erileine scooped the last slice of grilled squash off her plate.
"Bosun Uyves asked that too.  Said he wasn't going to answer any more
questions unless he got some answers.  I thought Jaromir was going to
get angry, but then he said, why not?"

*Bosun Uyves stood straight and tall, his hands tied behind his back.
The tinker, who had clearly always been much more than just that, sat
on the other side of the tavern table, toying absently with the
homestone around his neck*

*Two soldiers stood guard at Mayeule's door.  A third sat on a bench
behind Jaromir, taking notes.  Something about her face made the back
of Erileine's mind itch.*

*"Your first question is probably why we're here," Jaromir said.*

*The bosun made a sound deep in his throat.  "Eat cake.  What have you
done with the captain?"*

*The Hett shook his head.  "I don't know.  I wasn't at Hepje Het,
although some of my men were.  They told me that the fighting didn't
last long, so he may have survived.  If I get word, I promise I will
tell you."*

*"You can eat your promises, too."*

*Jaromir tsk'd.  "Like it or not, Uyves, you and I are going to have
to work together.  Your people are going to want to tend their beans,
and my men have to be able to go about their business without worrying
about someone putting an ax in them.  If you and I can't get along,
things could go very, very hard here, and neither of us wants that."*

*He tucked the stone around his neck back under his shirt.  "Now,
about your irrigation system–we have some ideas that might reduce the
amount of water you need…" The soldier who was taking notes pulled a
hand-drawn map from the broad leather envelope at her side and passed
it to the lieutenant.*

"That's when I recognized her," Erileine said.  "She was here.  Not
last year, the year before, when we were at Gandan Berth.  She was
selling portraits, remember?  I think she did one of Niquolas and
Matthieu." She nodded at her sister.  "You wanted one too, but maere
said we couldn't afford it."

"What–she wasn't Hett," Queçenne said.

"Of course she wasn't," Piaerre said, with just a hint of the scornful
tone Erileine was used to.  "Spies are never what they seem to be."

"Razi," Laeuc said suddenly.  "Saints, do you think he was working for
them?"

"No." Erileine said quickly.  "No, I'm sure he wasn't."

"How can you be so sure?" Vurt asked from behind him.

Erileine and Piaerre looked at each other.  "Because Razi works for
Lady Kembe," Erileine said resignedly.  "He killed some Hett in
Forecastle when they attacked."

She used the stunned silence that followed to wipe the last of the
gravy off her plate with her finger.  "It started just after the
mountain changed course…"

It took Erileine less time than she'd expected to tell her family
about the secrets she had been keeping.  Her mother's face grow
stonier with each passing moment, while her father and sister looked
at her as if she was a stranger.

When she finished, though, her grandfather put his hand on Erileine's
shoulder and shook her gently.  "Good job," he said.  "Now, let me see
that hand of yours."

Erileine held it out, palm up.  Papaere Vurt studied it.  "Doesn't
look any different."

Erileine shrugged.  "It still tingles a bit.  Right here." She made a
ring around her wrist with her other hand.  "I have to wiggle the
fingers every once in a while or it starts itching, too."

"You could try some of the skin cream I bought in Mau Ngapcha,"
Queçenne volunteered diffidently.  "If you wanted."

Erileine smiled at her sister.  "Thanks.  Maybe in the morning." The
cream smelled like flowers, even from half a dozen strides away, but
the old woman who'd sold it to Queçenne had sworn that it would cure
just about anything except a cold.

"Yes, well…" Laeuc cleared his throat.  "We should think about bed, I
suppose.  Tomorrow's probably going to be a busy day."

"Um, about that." Erileine cleared her throat.  "Jaromir said that we
have to tear down anything that's on top of the old tunnels.  He wants
it done right away."

It took a moment for her words to sink in.  "Tear down–that's
ridiculous!" Her mother laughed angrily.  "Donaien and Armaend are
right on top of one.  They use it for a cellar."

"That's what the bosun said.  Jaromir said it didn't matter.  He said
we'd have to move the smokehouse, too.  The bosun asked him how we'd
get water if we couldn't use the tunnels, and he said they were going
to take care of that for us."

"But they can't *do* that!" Saedanne spluttered.  "These are our
homes!"

"The bosun said that too." And that was when Lieutenant Jaromir got
angry.  He didn't raise his voice or pound the table, or have his men
hit the bosun again, but the Hett might have been looking at a weed
that needed pulling rather than a living, breathing man.

"No, Uyves," he said.  "This isn't your home.  It never was, not
really.  It's ours.  It always was, and it always will be.  We've been
away, but we're back now.  I suggest you get used to it."

Vurt, Mayeule, and Piaerre spent the night.  They didn't have a
choice–when they tried to leave, the Hett patrolling Slip Street
turned them back.  "Curfew," they said.  It might have been the only
word of Avauntois they knew.  "Curfew."

Erileine gave up her bedroom, and was less surprised than her mother
when Vurt and Mayeule announced that they would share it.  She was
equally unsurprised at how quickly Piaerre hit it off with both of
them: her grandfather told Piaerre one tall tale after another,
laughing as Mayeule interrupted every few sentences to correct his
exaggerations and outright fabrications.  If it hadn't been for the
occasional whistle on the street, or her mother's raised voice coming
from her parents' bedroom, it would have been wonderful.

Finally, though, it was time to sleep.  She and Piaerre piled coats
and spare blankets on the floor downstairs.  "It's like the walk from
Forecastle all over again," Erileine grumbled, rolling her father's
spare shirt into a pillow.

"Oh, I'm used to sleeping out," Piaerre said airily.

"What about your family?" Erileine asked.

Piaerre studied the silhouette portrait that hung on the wall.  A
young Bantangui woman with a shaved head and exaggerated false
eyebrows had drawn it the winter Erileine turned eight.  Laeuc and
Saedanne's profiles filled the center.  Above them, half as large,
were Laeuc's parents and Papaere Vurt; Saedanne's mother had died a
year too early to be in the picture.  Queçenne and Erileine were below
their parents, facing away from each other.  "I don't want to talk
about them," Piaerre said.

"Why not?"

Piaerre made a face.  "I said, I don't want to talk about it."

"All right." Erileine gave up trying to find a soft spot on her
makeshift pillow and closed her eyes.  "Sleep well."

"Sleep well."

A minute passed.  "Erileine?"

"Mm?"

"When you helped Razi…  Did it hurt?"

Erileine squeezed her unfeeling hand.  "Yup."

"Oh." A pause.  "A lot?"

"Yup."

"Oh." Another pause.  "I'd have done it for him too, if I'd been
there."

"I know." This time it was Erileine who paused.  "I think…  I don't
think I really did it for him, though."

She heard a rustle as Piaerre rolled onto her stomach.  "So who'd you
do it for?"

Erileine swallowed.  If she'd been able to see him, she would have
mumbled, "Never mind," but there in the dark, home again after
everything that had happened, everything that had been stewing in her
finally bubbled over.  "I did it for– I did it because when the
mountain shook the first time, I was standing right next to someone,
and maybe if I'd done something then, I could have stopped him from
falling, and…  I thought maybe doing this would, you know, balance
things somehow."

"Huh.  That's stupid." Piaerre rolled onto his back again.

"Oh really?" Erileine said, stung.

"Mm hm.  Razi says that good and bad aren't like profit and loss.
They don't add up or cancel out.  They just *are*, and whatever you've
done, you've done."

"Well, I guess I missed that lesson."

"I guess you did." She heard him yawn.  "But it was still pretty brave
of you."

An itch woke Erileine a few hours later.  She shifted on her pile of
blankets, listening to Piaerre's soft nasal snore as she tried to
figure what wanted scratching.  The itch seemed to be all over at
once.

*Erileine…* It wasn't a sound.  It was a *knowledge*.  Lady Kembe
wanted to talk to her…

"Hello?" she whispered.  Piaerre grunted and rolled onto his side.

She waited until she heard him snoring again.  "Hello?" she repeated.
"My lady?"

*Erileine…* The itch ebbed and vanished.  After a long moment, she lay
down once more.

---

A heavy knock on the door woke them just before dawn.  Erileine
scraped the sleep out of her eyes and answered it.

Two Hett soldiers stood there with the bosun.  "Rise and shine," Uyves
said sourly.  His hair, normally so carefully tended, looked like a
goat had been at it.  That, and his black eye, made him look like some
half-mad cousin of the dapper bosun Erileine knew.

"Erileine, who is it?" Her father hurried down the stairs as Piaerre
slipped silently into the kitchen.

"It's me, Laeuc.  The *lieutenant* wants everybody out in the fields."
The bosun's expression made it clear what he thought of the idea.
"And he wants Erileine for translating."

Erileine heard footsteps on the stairs her mother joined them.
"Laeuc, what's happening?" Saedanne asked.

"The soldiers want Erileine out with them.  To translate."

Her jaw set.  "No.  I won't have it.  She's just a child, Uyves."

Uyves' hands bunched into fists, and for a moment Erileine thought he
was going to take a swing at the soldiers beside him.  Then his hands
unclenched and he said, "It isn't your choice, Sae."

"Then whose is it?" she demanded sharply.

The bosun looked at her levelly.  "It's mine.  As far as I'm
concerned, until the captain relieves me, I'm still in charge here,
and I say Erileine goes with them."

"But–" Saedanne and Laeuc spoke at the same time, stopped, and
exchanged looks, Saedanne's angry and Laeuc's pleading.

One of the soldiers nudged the other.  "*Irre pentelele arpe hebmedji
sheh kerremerpele*," he said, nodding past the trio in the doorway.
Erileine twisted around to see Queçenne peeking out of the kitchen.
The soldier caught her eye and grinned.  She blushed and pulled her
head back out of sight.  The other soldier laughed.

Erileine didn't understand all of what the soldier had said, but she
understood enough.  "*Ap medji eshweggen*," she said.  "Sit firmly on
your sword." The soldiers just laughed again.

Uyves put his hand on Erileine's arm. "You do their translating," he
said quietly. "And then you come find me and tell me *everything* you
hard, undersood?"

Erileine nodded jerkily. "Yes *sra*."  He squeezed her arm and then
turned to the soldiers and nodded once, firmly.

"Tell them they are to work in the fields as they would on any other
day," the first soldier said slowly in Praczny.  Erileine nodded and
translated his words into Gandan-o.

"What if we don't work in the fields?" Papaere Vurt asked.  Instead of
putting on his false leg, he had hobbled downstairs with his pant leg
pinned below his knee, using an upside-down broom as a crutch.  He
looked older than Erileine had ever seen him–deliberately so, she
realized.  What was her grandfather up to?

The soldier shrugged when Erileine passed on Vurt's question.  "Tell
him to stay out of trouble.  Now come."

Bosun Uyves knocked on each door in turn.  Sometimes he had to bang
his fist and bellow to get the fearful inhabitants to answer.  Other
times, the door flew open before his meaty hand even hit it.  "They
want us up in the fields," Erileine said over and over.  "Just like
any other day."

"So we're to be slaves, are we?" Gaeston snarled when his turn came.
He glared at the soldiers with bloodshot eyes.  "Well, I'm not going
to be a house gelding for them.  You tell them that!  You tell them
this isn't Ini weeping Bantang, and they're not the Midnight weeping
Admirals!"

"Put a cork in, you idiot," the bosun growled.  "This isn't the time
or the place.  And anyway, it's our own food we're growing.  Or were
you planning to eat moss next week?"

Gaeston crossed his arms and leaned against the doorframe.  "I'm not
doing it."

Erileine turned to the soldiers.  "*Aweche panja nesh…* um, *nesh
perwerketeppen ubbo*."

The soldiers glanced at each other.  The first one shrugged.  The
second one turned back to Gaeston and kicked him hard between the
legs.

As Gaeston doubled over, the first soldier put his hand on Uyves' arm
to restrain him.  "*Bashte,*" he said warningly.

"Eat cake," the bosun spat.  "You're a bunch of animals!  Hells,
you're worse than most of the animals I know!"

"Worse than you?" the second soldier asked in strongly accented
Gandan-o.  "Worse than you do all the Hett here?"

With a final glare, Uyves turned to Gaeston.  "All right, stand up.  A
walk will shake 'em back into place."

Slowly, painfully, Gaeston straightened up.  The look he gave the
soldiers was filled with venom.  He took his coat from the hook by the
door and shrugged it on, then made a show of closing the door behind
him.  As he stepped around Erileine, he pretended to stumble slightly.
Catching hold of her shoulder, he put his mouth next to her ear.
"Leech," he hissed.

By the time they reached the top of Slip Street the entire town was
either in the fields or trying to look busy around their edges.
Hundreds of townspeople, and only three dozen soldiers… For one heady
moment, Erileine thought about shouting, "Charge!" So what if the
soldiers had armor and swords?  Unless one of them was secretly a
magician, the townspeople would surely win.  She imagined herself
dodging the soldiers' thrusts, knocking one down, snatching up her
dropped sword and crying, "Avaunt!  Avaunt!"

But how many of the people she had grown up with would die?  And
anyway, there would just be more soldiers.  In fact, there *were* more
soldiers.  When she looked up to the highest terrace, the early
morning sun gleamed on their helmets.  These ones cradled crossbows in
their arms as they watched the Avauntois pull up weeds and clean out
irrigation ditches.

Erileine caught the bosun looking at her.  She realized her lips had
been moving.  She shook her head, embarrassed.  As she turned away,
Matthieu tugged on his shirt.  "Are we allowed to use the stinky
house?" he asked anxiously.

Erileine smiled reassuringly.  "I'm sure we are." He caught the eye of
a nearby soldier.  "*Ippe arenteme ephwe bae cakhuisa?*" The soldier
shrugged and waved his hand.  "Go ahead," Erileine told Mattheiu.

Striding up the path, Lieutenant Jaromir turned his head as Matthieu
lumbered by.  The boy's steps quickened when he saw the lieutenant, as
if he wanted to break into a run, but stopped himself.  Erileine felt
a moment of pride.

"Good morning," the lieutenant said to Erileine.

"*Sra*." Watching the soldiers nearby salute, Erileine wondered if she
was expected to do the same, and what her mother–never mind
Gaeston–would say if she did.

The lieutenant studied the people in the field.  After a moment,
Erileine realized he was counting them.  "Pretty much everyone's
here," Erileine offered.  "Except the little ones.  Mamaere Mayeule
has them for lessons."

"Yes, I stopped in there on my way up," Jaromir said absently.  "And
your papaere, of course.  I passed him on Slip Street.  Is something
wrong with his leg?  I've never seen him with a crutch before."

Erileine flushed.  "Um, sometimes he doesn't wear it.  *Sra*.  Says it
gives him sores if he doesn't give it a rest."

"Mm." Jaromir acknowledged the lie with a nod.  "I imagine you were
sorry to see the bookster leave.  I certainly was–he's an interesting
man.  How long had you been his apprentice?"

Erileine shrugged.  "Since Mau Ngapcha.  He came here to catalog the
books in the Captain's House, and…"  She shrugged again.

"Mm.  How far did he get?"

*I shouldn't shrug so much,* Erileine thought, shrugging.  "Less than
half, *sra*."

"Mm.  Well, I'd like you to keep sorting through them.  It would be a
shame to stop in the middle, and it will help you with your studies."

"*Sra*?"

"Your studies," Jaromir repeated.  "You do still want to be a
bookster, don't you?" He nodded toward the nearest knot of
townspeople.  "It's probably the best thing you could do to help your
people."

Erileine hesitated.  "*Sra*… If it's all right, I should help my
family right now.  I can start studying again later."

"Mm." The lieutenant nodded.  "You don't want to stand out, do you?
Soldier's pet, and all that." The corner of his mouth twitched.
"Believe me, I know what that feels like.  Try being Hett for a few
years.  You'll learn a lot more about being singled out than you ever
wanted to."

"Yes, *sra*." Erileine hesitated.  "*Sra*?"

"Mm?"

"What is the Great Work?"

Jaromir clapped her on the shoulder.  "All in good time."  He nodded
to Erileine and strode away, ignoring, oblivious to, or perhaps even
enjoying the sidelong hatred the Avauntois threw his way.

Erileine certainly felt them, though.  As she hurried up the path to
the terrace where her family was working, they felt as hot as the
desert sun.  "Don't blame me," she wanted to shout.  "I didn't want to
do this," but she knew that would only make things worse.

When she reached the terrace, she grabbed a rake and attacked the
nearest furrow furiously.  "What was that all about?" Laeuc asked.

"He wants me to keep working in the Captain's House," Erileine said.
"He said it would be the best way to help."

"Help?  Help what?"

"Help u," Erileine replied bitterly.  "I mean, us.  The Avauntois."
The word sounded strange in her ears.

"Wonderful," her mother said under her breath.  "Marq asked me what in
hell's burning forests you were doing.  Gaeston wasn't even that
polite.  I told them you didn't have a choice, they picked you out
because you knew their language, but I don't think they care." She
grabbed the base of a thistle and yanked it from the dry soil.

"Did either of them say what they thought I should do instead?"
Erileine asked bitterly.

"Easy, easy," Laeuc whispered at them urgently.  "Let's not fight, all
right?"

His wife pulled another thistle from the ground.  "Just like
always–let's not fight, let's not disagree, let's try to see *their*
side.  Maybe it's time you started seeing *our* side for once."

Erileine held her breath as her father stood up and brushed his hands
clean.  "Yes, well," he said uncertainly.  "So what can you tell us
about the boy you brought with you?  She and Mayeule seem to be
getting along fine, but…"

"He tried to steal the bosun's wallet when we went to Forecastle.
They put him in the dungeon, but I think he escaped.  It's all right,"
she added hastily.  "We can trust him.  The bookster did."

Saedanne tore another thistle from the ground.  "Erileine, until we
know what's going on, the only people we can trust are ourselves.  Do
you understand?  Not this boy you brought with you that no one here
has ever met before, not the bookster, no one who wasn't born here."

"What about papaere?" Erileine asked bitterly.  "He's wasn't born
here.  And come to that, you're only half Avauntois."

"Erileine!" her father said sharply.  "You will *not* speak to your
mother that way."

Erileine looked at the ground sullenly.  "Where is Piaerre anyway?"

"Armaend and Donaien took her," Laeuc said curtly.

Erileine looked over at the next field, where Armaend, Donaien, and
Piaerre were working.  "I have to talk to him," she said.  She walked
away without looking back, thinking that she'd rather be fighting the
Hett soldiers than fighting her parents.

Donaien was sitting on an overturned bucket pointing out weeds to
Piaerre, while Armaend pointed out the ones he missed and Piaerre
gossipped non-stop about people in Forecastle: who took quick nips
from a bottle hidden under the counter when there were no customers in
his shop, whose daughters looked nothing at all like her husband, who
had shortchanged himself in a complex business deal in Mau Ngapcha…

*They're enjoying his company more than they ever enjoyed mine*,
Erileine thought sourly.  He was certainly better at talking than he
was at gardening–he had smudges on his face from brushing his hair out
of her eyes with her dirty hands.  And then she wondered if those were
accidental, or whether it was something Razi had taught him to hide
his appearance.

"Clear day," Erileine said, smiling insincerely.  "Can I borrow him
for a few moments?"

Donaien sat back.  "As long as you keep weeding," he said.  "Unless
they said you don't have to?"

"We'll keep weeding," Erileine promised.

"They're fun," Piaerre said, sitting back on his haunches and watching
the two men as they ambled over to the other side of the field, lost
in one of their endless domestic not-quite-arguments.

Erileine shrugged.  "I suppose." She sat down on Donaien's bucket.
"Listen, we have to get Razi's things."  Quickly, she told him about
hearing Lady Kembe's voice in the night.

He nodded.  "All right.  Do you remember where they are?"

Erileine blinked.  "Don't you?"

"There's a lot of trees out there," he said defensively.  "If we'd put
them in someone's basement, or on a roof, I'd remember for sure."

Erileine rolled her eyes.  "Fine.  I can get them this afternoon, but
how are we going to sneak them into town?"

"Leave that to me," Piaerre said confidently.

---

Erileine offered to share her lunch with Piaerre at midday, but he
declined.  "Mamaere Mayeule's expecting me," he said, tossing a last
handful of weeds into the bucket.  "But don't worry–I'll be back in
time."

Erileine rehearsed her story on her way to the Captain's House.  *I
need peace and quiet to study.  And someone needs to check on the
goats.* When she knocked on the library door, the soldier who had been
taking notes the night before answered.  "*Eue?*" Erileine started to
explain what she wanted.  Halfway through her third sentence, the
soldier said, "*Eshe*," and let her in.

She and another soldier Erileine hadn't seen before had taken over the
long table in the center of the library.  The books that she and Razi
had left there lay in neat piles on the floor.  In their place was a
printed map of Avaunt, crisscrossed with dashed lines that could only
be tunnels.  As the Hett bent over it, homestones dangled around their
necks.

Erileine pulled a book from the nearest pile, thanked the soldier, and
fled.  Back on Slip Street, she willed himself to walk more slowly.
"Just act normal," she said under his breath, repeating Piaerre's
parting words.

The soldiers at the edge of town turned him back.  She protested, but
her Praczny wasn't enough to convince them that a skinny girl with a
book under her arm had permission to go anywhere.

Back at the beanfields, Lieutenant Jaromir seemed pleased.  "They'd
have been cleaning underpits for a month if they'd let you by," he
said approvingly.  He took a flat metal token from his pocket and
handed it to her.  "Here.  Show them this.  But mind the curfew–you're
to be indoors by sundown like everyone else."

"Yes, *sra*." Erileine tucked the pass into her copy of *The Customs,
Laws, and Language of Northern Praczedt: A Guide For Those So
Fortunate As To Have Been Born Elsewhere*, by A Gentleman.  It was
just stamped brass, but it felt dirty in her hand.

The soldiers barely glanced at the pass before waving her on.  As she
walked through the woods, Erileine kept glancing into the trees to see
if any more soldiers were lurking among them.  She couldn't, but that
just made her more nervous.

The goals were as uninterested in her as usual.  She found a flat rock
to sit on, and opened her book.  "*Errebe*…  I was.  Past tense."  She
flexed her hand as she read, wiggling her fingers to ease the itching
around her wrist until she suddenly remembered that Queçenne had
pressed some of her precious Bantangui skin cream on her that morning.
She fished the brown pottery vial out of her pocket, pulled the cork–

–and froze.  "In Marandine, the chief village of the cloudherds, I met
three men who claimed to be nobility from Anyalcze," she whispered.
"They were fleeing prosecution for a crime which they swore they had
not committed, though in all my travels in that sorry country, I have
never yet met one who did not deserve prosecution for something.
Seeking to avoid…whatever, they came roundabout the mountains through
a town they called Tin Head."

A chill prickled the small hairs on Erileine's arms.  She put the skin
cream down and turned the book over to look at its cover.  It couldn't
be a coincidence.  Was Lady Kembe trying to send her a message?  Or
was picking up this book just some leftover bit of magic intended for
the bookster?

She opened the book again.  "They came roundabout the mountains
through a town they called Tin Head.  It is in Anyalcze's lands, but
not of it, as its people do not recognize the length of its dukes.
No, wait, that must be 'rule'."  *Its people have some small farming,
but are miners by love and trade.  The least ill-kept among the
Praczny said that they worshipped the earth as the Ruudians do the
sun.  Another disagreed, saying that they worshipped not the earth,
but some speaking stone they had found in it that was their king and
oracle.  The third (who was the only one among them able to hold a
fork properly) agreed with the second, and spoke further of some Great
Work upon which these people believed themselves embarked.  He knew
not what it was, but claimed they had invited him to join them in it.
At which point, his companions grew sullen, wondering aloud why he had
not spoken of this beforetimes.  For all their pretty accents, I am
confident that by the time these words are before you, Learned Reader,
they will separately or jointly have been unheaded as they undoubtedly
deserve.*

Erileine stared into the distance.  What *was* the "Great Work"?  It
couldn't mean invading the mountain–Lieutenant Jaromir had spoken as
if it still lay ahead.  As hard as it was to stomach, it seemed that
conquering Avaunt was just a stepping stone to something else.  But
what?

She scrambled to her feet, suddenly impatient to be moving.  It only
took her a few minutes to reach the spot where she, Razi, and Piaerre
had come out of the forest onto Forecastle Road.  An irving trilled
nearby.  A bush rustled slightly in answer.  She tensed, then relaxed
at the white-and-brown flash of a rabbit darting away.

Kneeling, she looked around as she pretended to re-tie her boot lace.
There was no sign of any Hett soldiers.  There was no more reason to
delay.  She took a deep breath and chinned herself up onto the first
branch.  It took her two tries and one near-fall to hook a leg over
it.  Sap stickied her hands, and pine needles crawled inside her shirt
as she winced at the noise she was making.

There.  She slung Razi's leather case over her shoulder, then undid
her fleece vest, and slipped the sword bottle inside.  It was heavier
than she had expected, and warm, like water left standing in the sun.
She lowered herself to the ground and brushed as much of the sap off
her hands as she could.

Ten minutes later she was crouching behind a shrub at the edge of the
woods on the edge of the lower beanfields, cursing Piaerre in
Gandan-o, Karabandi, and Praczny.  Where was he?  The sun was about to
kiss the peak of the mountain–any longer, and she'd have to hide
Razi's things again to get home before curfew.

He came around the corner a moment later pushing a wheelbarrow full
twigs and thistles.  Erileine sighed with relief.  The only soldier
she could see was two terraces away, and seemed more interested in
getting the inside of his nose clean than in a boy doing chores.

Piaerre reached the edge of the field.  "Gosh, how silly of me," he
said loudly.  "I wasn't supposed to bring this here.  I was supposed
to take it to the burning pit.  Oh, but it's so heavy.  It would be
wonderful if someone could help me."

"Sst," Erileine hissed from the woods.  "Piaerre.  Stop it!  This
isn't a game!"

He put his hand to his ear theatrically.  "What's that?  It sounded
like a snake."

"Bring it over here," Erileine whispered loudly.  "Closer to the
trees."

Piaerre trundled the wheelbarrow closer.  Erileine crept forward and
tucked the case and bottle under the thistles.  "Are they covered?"
she whispered.  Piaerre nodded.  "All right.  Is anyone watching?"

Piaerre glanced casually over his shoulder.  "Uh uh."

"Good." Erileine handed him her book.  "Here, take this.  I'll push."

Piaerre looked her up and down.  "You look like you've been sleeping
in a bush again," he said critically.  "Someone's going to want to
know why."

Erileine glanced down at herself.  He was right–she was plastered with
pine needles, bits of twig, and a clump of something that she hoped
was dirt.  "Great."

Piaerre thrust the book back into her hands.  "Hang on."  He lay down
on the ground and rolled over a few times.

Erileine gaped at him.  "What are you doing?"

He stood up and studied the twigs and bits of grass that were now
clinging to his jacket.  "That should do," he said, satisfied.  "Come
on."

Together, they trundled the wheelbarrow back across the field.  "Looks
like you two have been busy," one of the soldiers said loudly in
Praczny as they went past, elbowing his partner in the ribs.  Erileine
blushed furiously as the other man guffawed.

Queçenne's jaw dropped as she caught sight of her little sister and
the boy she had brought back from Forecastle, looking as though they
had been wrestling–or something–on the forest floor.  All Erileine
could think was that she hoped her mother wouldn't see her before she
had a chance to clean up.  She would almost rather be tortured by the
Hett…

Halfway down Slip Street, Erileine turned the wheelbarrow into the
narrow lane beside Mamaere Mayeule's.  The shutters on the kitchen
window had been left open.  As they went past, Piaerre slipped the
case and bottle out from under the trash and pushed them through the
window.  There was a faint thud as they fell onto the waiting pile of
blankets.

Back on the street, Erileine felt as though she had an archery target
pinned between her shoulderblades.  She emptied the wheelbarrow into
the stone-lined burning pit behind the outhouses, just as she had a
hundred times before.  She hated the pit's acrid, ashy smell.  Every
time the mountain berthed at Mau Ngapcha, the townspeople shoveled it
out and spread its contents on their fields.  It was a dirty, choking
job.

She sighed loudly.  "What's wrong?" Piaerre asked.

"Nothing."  Erileine shook her head.  "Just missing something I never
thought I'd miss.  Let's go."

The sun had just touched the mountains as Piaerre wheeled the
wheelbarrow back to the fields.  Erileine trudged over to her father,
who was kneeling next to another man.  "Just about done?" Erileine
asked.

"Just about," Laeuc said.  "But there's someone here who wants to talk
to you."

The other man carefully patted a handful of earth around the base of
the squash he had just replanted.  "Hello, Erileine," he said.  "How's
your hand?"  He stood, brushing the dirt from his hands.  He looked
completely ordinary, with a round, dark face, dark hair, and a solemn
expression.

Suddenly, just for an instant, Erileine's eyes refocused.  Orange
hair, blue eyes, a mocking grin–it was Thomas.

Erileine gasped.  The illusion rippled back into place.  "Best not to
gawp," he said calmly.  "Don't want any soldiers paying too much
attention to your long-lost uncle, do we?  Now, if you'd be so kind, I
could use a hand with this." The magician knelt once again and began
uprooting another squash.

Erileine went down on her knees beside him.  "What are you doing
here?" she hissed.  "I thought you ran away."

"Flew away, actually," the magician corrected.  "I find it much more
efficient.  Pass me that trowel, would you?"

Erileine clenched her teeth.  "You tell me what you're doing here, or
I'm going straight to Lieutenant Jaromir."

"Don't raise your voice to me, whelp." Thomas's voice was as sweet as
cream.  "And keep in mind, any conversation I have with the good
lieutenant will almost certainly come around to the subject of your
left hand.  Oh yes, I know about that–candlemark is easy to see if you
have the right eyes.  I'll bet the lieutenant would know what it was.
As a matter of fact…" Thomas sat back on his haunches, looking
thoughtful.  "As a matter of fact, I'd be surprised if his masters
didn't already know about it."

"Really?  Then why haven't they already arrested me?"

Thomas shrugged.  "I suppose they've decided that there's no point
ruffling the good lady's feathers."

Before Erileine could answer, a soldier called, "*Yevve!*" from the
terrace above them–time's up.  She stood up, brushing the dirt from
her hands–

–and stumbled as the mountain lurched beneath her.  Someone shrieked.
Birds exploded into the air from the trees fifty strides away, and a
tray of clay winter planting pots toppled over with a crash.

Laeuc grabbed his daughter's arm.  "What the hells is happening?"

"We've taking off, obviously," Thomas snapped, surging to his feet.
"How very inconvenient.  Girl!  Where's your master?"

"The soldiers took him to Forecastle!" Erileine said.

A nasty smile danced a brief jig across Thomas's lips.  "Really?  Did
they put him in chains?  Oh please, tell me they put him in chains."

"No!" Above them, more soldiers were shouting *yevve, yevve!* as they
walked in a broad line across the field shooing the Avauntois toward
Slip Street.

Thomas scowled.  "Did he leave her portrait with you?"

"What?"

"Did he leave his picture of Lady Kembe with you?" the magician
repeated impatiently.  "I need it to talk to her."

"Why would *she* want to talk to *you*?"

Thomas sighed.  "Because I'm here and he isn't.  We *are* all trying
to save the world, you know."

Erileine hesitated.  "It's at Mamaere Mayeule's," she admitted,
mentally adding, *But you're not getting his sword.* "I was going to
use it tonight."

Another shudder ran through the ground.  A breeze had sprung up, not
strong, but enough to put frightened looks on everyone's faces.  They
were going straight up.

"I think we may want to try a little earlier," Thomas said.

---

Mamaere Mayeule set out the best she had for dinner–spiced pork
sausages, rice with fresh cauliflower, and a jar of mango chutney that
she had been saving to give Vurt as a naming day present–but the mood
around her big table was somber.  Uyves sat glowering beside Laeuc,
having declared that he'd walk home when they finished eating, curfew
or no curfew, and take his bruises as they came.  Piaerre was
upstairs, having refused (much to the magician's amusement) to sit at
the same table as Thomas.

A cup of strong tea cooled untouched near Thomas's elbow as he told
them all what he had seen.  Hidden among the clouds aboard the
*Presumption*, he had watched squads of Hett soldiers fan out from
boarded-up wells and forgotten basements to cut Forecastle's
neighborhoods off from one another.  As they took control of the
streets, a quartet of magicians threw banefire every time the militia
tried to repulse them.

"It was really quite impressive," he said, as if commenting on a
children's ball game.  "Especially considering the spell's price."

"Which is what?" the bosun demanded.

Thomas tapped a finger against his temple.  "Your eyes.  Both of
them."  Erileine thought of the Hett she had seen in the sedan chair
in Forecastle, but said nothing.

Portside fell next.  There had been real fighting there, but again,
the outcome was never in doubt.  "What do you mean, real fighting?"
Saedanne asked.

Thomas cleared his throat.  "Yes.  Well, your side managed to put some
arrows into the first few Hett they saw, so the rest went back into
the tunnels and waited for reinforcements.  By the time they arrived,
the bosun and a few of his friends had made a little fort for
themselves in a barn."

"So the Hett fired it," Vurt said flatly.  Thomas nodded.

"Oh dear saints," Saedanne breathed.

Then it had been Starboard Town's turn.  Perhaps they had learned from
Portside, or perhaps their plan had been different all along, but when
they came, they came in greater numbers.  Thomas hadn't bothered to
watch them seize Aft Landing.  Instead, he had flown in under the
cover of the morning fog and set down near Vurt's cottage.

"So why'd you come back?" the bosun asked, sitting back and crossing
his arms.

In answer, Thomas took a sea shell out of his pocket and passed it to
Erileine.  Faint seams of pink and gold shone in its ivory white
whorl.  "Here–listen."

Erileine turned it over.  It was heavier than it looked, and smelled
faintly sandy.  "Go ahead," Thomas urged her.  "It won't bite."

Erileine held it up to her ear.  At first, all she heard was a rushing
sound, like air being blown over the mouth of a bottle.  Then,
faintly, he heard dozens of voices whispering in Gandan-o, Praczny,
and a dozen other languages.

"What is it?" Laeuc asked as her eyes widened.

"Voices," Erileine said, handing it back to the magician.  "Hundreds
of voices."

Thomas set the shell on the table.  "Despite what playwrights would
have us believe, most people don't actually indulge in soliloquies.
And when they do, well, half of them are practicing what they should
have said the night before, while the rest are making sure that if
they're ever made Emir of Coriandel, they'll have an acceptance speech
ready.  No, thank you." He waved away the teapot Mamaere Mayeule
lifted.  "But they do talk about useful things once in a while.  You
just have to be patient.  Like the Hett–as near as I can tell, they've
been working for over a hundred years to get Avaunt back."

"Back?"  The bosun thumped his fist on the table.  "The mountain is
*ours*!  My great-grandfather's naming day tree is up the top of this
hill, and his mother's is right next to it!"

"Mm," Thomas nodded.  "But if you walk up the road a little further,
you might still find some the Hett planted when they lived here."

"That was five hundred years ago!  It's our home now!" He pushed
himself back in his chair and glared at Laeuc, who had been shooting
worried glances at the front door.

"And if they throw you off tomorrow, will it still be your mountain in
a hundred years?" Thomas asked.  "Or two hundred?"

"Damned right it will!"

"Enough," Vurt said sharply.  "I want to know how they got the
mountain to change course.  And what they're going to do now."

"Ah, well," Thomas said, "That's where I have to start speculating.
It all comes down to something they call the *Uremme Bech*: the Guide
Stone."

Erileine's breath caught.  What had the book said?  They worshipped
not the earth, but some speaking stone they found in it that was their
king and oracle.  "It's 'Pilot Stone'," she corrected.  "Guide is just
*urem*, not *uremme*." She flushed slightly at Thomas's look.

"Pilot Stone, then.  They found in a mine.  It may even be why they
started mining in the first place–it spoke to them in their dreams.
'The world is broken, free me and we will mend it…'"  He waved his
words away.  "After four hundred years of being pushed around, I
imagine it was quite seductive."

Whatever angry retort the bosun might have made was cut short by a
sudden wail from the floor above.  "That's Piaerre!" Erileine
exclaimed.  As she struggled to untangle her legs from the chair's,
Mamaere Mayeule hurried up the stairs.  A door opened; there was
another wail, then sobbing.

Mayeule led the weeping boy down to the common room a moment later
"He's dead!" Piaerre wailed.  "He's dead!"

"Who's dead?" Mamaere Mayeule asked.  "The bookster?"

"N-no," Piaerre hiccupped wretchedly.  "Th-the captain.  They killed
him."

"Oh dear saints," Mayeule whispered, folding the boy into her arms.

"Hoy," Laeuc said gently, as if coaxing a kitten out from under a bed.
"How do you know?"

"Because I *felt* it!" Piaerre pushed Mamaere Mayeule away and wiped
his nose on his sleeve.

"Sure you did," the bosun muttered disbelievingly, rolling his eyes.

But even as he spoke, Thomas pushed him aside.  "What did you feel?"
he demanded, ignoring the bosun's glare.  "Tell me, what *exactly* did
you feel?"

Piaerre sniffled back his tears.  "It was c-c-cold.  All of a sudden.
And then it was like–like–"

"Like you were a bell being run?" Thomas demanded.  Piaerre nodded
miserably.

The magician straightened up and ran his fingers through his hair.
"Well, that's that, then, isn't it?" He stabbed a finger at Erileine.
"I need that portrait *now*!"

"You don't believe this little snip, do you?" the bosun scoffed.

The corner of Thomas's mouth twitched.  "I'd show a little more
respect if I were you.  This little snip is your new captain."

A stunned silence followed.  Uyves opened his mouth, closed it, opened
it again, and still didn't manage to get a word out before Piaerre
fished a small silver medallion out from under his shirt.  The bosun's
eyes widened at the sight of it.  Straightening up, he saluted, eyes
focused somewhere slightly left of the shamefaced boy. "*Sra*."

Erileine just gaped. "But–"

"My paere wanted me to learn my way around," Piaerre said, his voice
not much louder than a whisper. "He said a good captain needs to know
the bilges as well as–as well as–" He sniffled. "And when Razi showed
up and wanted to look at all the old stuff here, paere said all right,
let's make a deal, and that's when he started teaching me stuff.  But
now he's gone and I don't know what to do."

Thomas pointed at Erileine.  "The portrait–now."

Erileine took the stairs three at a time.  Evening had fallen; through
The tube containing Lady Kembe's picture lay on top of a roof beam,
right where she had told Piaerre to put it.  Standing on the bed, she
jumped up and tapped it with one hand, catching it as it fell, then
looked at the window.  The bottle containing Razi's sword stood on the
sill.  Should she?

"Erileine?"

"Just a beat!" She grabbed the bottle and its belt and hurried back
downstairs.

"The Hett are all out on the street," she whispered loudly.

"As long as they're not in here," Thomas said, sliding Lady Kembe's
portrait from its container.  "Now, bosun, if you wouldn't mind
watching the door?"

Without waiting, the magician rolled the picture flat on the table and
stood a candle beside it.  He didn't bother with a knife: he just
pinched the back of his left hand with the thumb and first finger of
his right and jerked.  Blood welled up where his nails cut the skin.

One drop, two, three…  "Good evening, *sra*," Thomas said, bowing
politely toward the picture.

"Where is she?" Laeuc whispered.

"Sh!" Erileine patted the air with her hand.  "I'll explain later."

The conversation was brief.  Thomas summarized what he had told the
Avauntois earlier, adding the news that the captain's son had felt him
pass.  Yes, he was safe, at least for now.  Yes, Thomas could get him
off the mountain–assuming, of course, that he could get off himself.
It was tied up nearby.  No.  No.  Yes, quite a few–they were
patrolling the street ("There is only one") in pairs.  No.  No.

Then Thomas fell silent, his frown deepening.  "Yes, *sra*," he
finally said.  "But they'll have to do the rest.  I can't…"  He spread
his hands apologetically, his sentence trailing off as the candle
flickered and died.

"Well?" Vurt asked.

Thomas rubbed his eyes.  "Whatever else the Hett believe in, they
don't appear to believe in wasting time.  Whatever their 'great work'
is, it's happening tonight, right at the top of the mountain, and she
wants us to stop it."

"*She* wants *us* to stop it?" Laeuc said incredulously.  "Why not
you?"

Thomas spread his hands.  "Because, as the bosun keeps saying, it's
your mountain."

Uyves snorted.  "All right, what are we supposed to do?"

"Lady Kembe says they'll be bringing it to the peak at midnight,"
Thomas said crisply, his usual insouciance evaporating.  "Our only
chance is to take the Pilot Stone away from them.  The tunnels run
most of the way, but the last gallop is out in the open.  I can take
six of you, no more–if you're lucky, and they're careless, you might
actually have a ghost's chance of grabbing it."

"And then what?  Smash it?"

"Absolutely not," Thomas said sharply.  "You bring it to me."

"Why not?" Uyves asked.  "One whack with a big enough hammer, and
that's the end of that."

"Possibly, but that stone is what keeps Avaunt flying.  If you smash
it, you'll all be part of the landscape a few heartbeats later."

Sudden suspicion turned Erileine's gut cold.  "You want it for
yourself, don't you?  You want to control the mountain like they've
been doing!"

Thomas sighed.  "Saints save me from the half-clever.  Yes,
conceivably, I might–*might*–be able to use it that way.  But why
would I want to?  Being your captain interests me rather less than
being a stable boy."

"Then why?" Vurt asked.

"Because I want to know how it works," he said.  He pointed at the
dayglass lantern in the middle of the table.  "They made that by the
ton, and all we can do is dig it up and polish it.  We're so *little*
compared to them.  Now, who's coming?"

It only took a minute to pick names.  Uyves, of course, but not Vurt,
not through the tunnels one leg.  Laeuc would come, and Gaeston was
the best archer in Starboard Town, so that meant Marq as his spearman,
and Armaend and Donaien made six.

The next question was how to get to the *Presumption*.

"You'll want me with you for that," Vurt said.  "I left a few things
on the stairs in case anyone came snooping."

Uyves nodded.  "Laeuc and I will get Gaeston and Marq.  Erileine, can
you get up to Donaien and Armaend's without being caught?" Erileine
nodded.  The bosun looked around the table.  "Well then?  Let's be on
with it."

---

Unable to watch as her father say an awkward goodbye to her mother,
Erileine bounded upstairs.  "Here," he said, handing a small book
bound in faded red leather to Piaerre.  "Something to read while we're
gone.  Razi gave it to me."

Piaerre opened it.  "*Unprofitable Speculations*," he read aloud.  "By
His Balance, Eimin di Cuayaçedil."

Thomas rolled his eyes.  "Oh, you *can't* be serious…"

Piaerre hugged the book.  "Thanks."

Erileine nodded, feeling as awkward as her father looked.  "Take care
of it, all right?  No folded corners or anything." She leaned forward
and kissed the Captain of Avaunt clumsily on the cheek.

A minute later, with both of the lanterns in the tavern's main room
covered, they slipped out the back door: Uyves, Thomas, and Laeuc in
front, Erileine and her grandfather behind them.  Two soldiers stood
at the top of Slip Street next to a lantern on a stake, just as they
had the night before.  Another lantern shone unguarded at the bottom
of the street.  Voices and laughter from the yard of the Captain's
House, and the sound of an inexpertly-played flute, gave evidence that
the Hett were making themselves at home.

"Wait!" Erileine hissed.

"What?" the bosun whispered back.

"Just wait." A moment later, she heard the creak of leather and the
scuff of a boot.

Erileine put her mouth to the bosun's ear.  "The soldiers with the
lanterns are just a decoy," she whispered.  "There's more by the
smokehouse.  You'll have to go around."

Uyves exchanged a look with Laeuc.  This wasn't the Erileine they had
known since childhood.

The night was cold and clear, the moon just a battered sliver in the
sky.  Stars twinkled around it, as indifferent and aloof as ice
crystals.  The mountain was flying north, farther than ever from its
age-old course and from everything the Avauntois had ever known.

Erileine crept from one hiding place to another, huddling where the
shadows were deepest.  Once she was only ten strides from a soldier
relieving himself in a wilted vanity garden, but the Hett didn't hear
her heart pounding behind the woodpile.

Donaien and Armaend's house nestled in a bend in the road like a baby
in the crook of its mother's arm.  A freshly-painted summer chair
stood beside the back door.  Gingerly, Erileine stepped onto it and
rapped her knuckles softly on the upstairs bedroom's shutters.
"Psst," she hissed through the slats.  "Donaien!  Armaend!"

Someone threw back a quilt.  Erileine ducked her head as the shutters
swung open.

Donaien blinked at her.  "Erileine–what are you doing?  The soldiers
will–"

"Get dressed," Erileine interrupted.  "And get your climbing harness,
and your spear.  The bosun's waiting for you.  Both of you."  She
grabbed at the windowsill to steady himself as the chair shifted
beneath him.  "We have to save the mountain."

It took less than a minute for the two men to collect their gear, and
scramble out the window, but it felt like an age to Erileine.  Finally
Donaien slithered out the window.  Armaend followed him, the harness
in his hand jingling slightly.

Corner to corner, house by house, one back yard at a time, they crept
like thieves through the town they had always called home.  A faint
tang of pine smoke hung in the air, as familiar to Erileine as the
smell of her own sweat.  A young goat bleated from a rooftop pen; a
cat darted across the street, startling them into silent immobility
for a moment.  Somewhere nearby, a soldier laughed at another's joke.
All around them, people sat in front of their fireplaces or lay awake
in their beds, wondering where they were bound, and what new disaster
would befall them tomorrow.

Thomas, Laeuc, Uyves, and Gaeston were waiting in the trees a dozen
strides past the bottom end of Slip Street.  Two soldiers lay
awkwardly on the ground beside them, their blood dark on the dark
ground.  Marq sat beside them, knotting a strip of cloth around a
wound in his leg.

"Saints–you've killed them!" Armaend gasped.

"Didn't have a choice," Gaeston said gruffly.  "And it's two less
we'll have to–"

"*Forchem!*" a harsh voice shouted behind them.  A sharp whistle
pierced the night.

"Go!" the bosun shouted, snatching up a sword that one of the fallen
soldiers had dropped and turning toward the shout.

*Thunk!* One moment he was standing, the next he was down on the
ground, his arms flung out at his sides and the feathered end of a
crossbow quarrel sticking up out of his chest like a lone tree on an
otherwise barren island.  His sword clattered on the cobblestones at
Erileine's feet.

*Swick!* Erileine cried out as another bolt whistled past her ear,
then turned and scrambled down the ladder two rungs at a time.  She
yelped when her grandfather grabbed her leg.  "Are you all right?" he
demanded.

"The bosun," Erileine choked.  "He's– Papaere, they shot him."

Papaere Vurt pushed her forward.  "Go with your paere!" A dozen
strides away, the *Presumption* bobbed up and down in the air next to
his verandah.  Gaeston, Donaien, and Armaend were already on board,
clutching white-knuckled at the gunwales as Laeuc awkwardly climbed in
beside them.

Erileine raced across the verandah.  Laeuc grabbed her hand and pulled
her over the gunwale just as someone shouted in pain and surprise at
the top of the stairs.

The Avauntois all ducked.  "What are you waiting for?" Papaere Vurt
yelled.  "Get out of here!" He yanked hard on the cord hanging beside
the latter rungs and was answered by another angry shout.

"Go!" he bellowed again.  Thomas tossed the mooring line into the
boat's bow and vaulted in after it.  The *Presumption* dipped slightly
and drifted away from the porch.

The *Presumption* heeled to port to point back the way the mountain
had come.  There was nothing left of Tinhead except a long scar in the
earth.  Beyond it, the great stone tower that had been built to await
the mountain's was a glint among the trees.  Erileine wondered what
people would make of it a thousand years hence.  Would anyone remember
why it had been built, or what it had meant?

"I'll remember," Erileine whispered, thinking of the bosun.  The tears
on her cheeks were cold, but she didn't wipe them away.  "I
promise–I'll remember."

Laeuc shifted beside her and put an arm around his daughter's
shoulders.  Erileine leaned against her father and wept.

As they flew through the night, Erileine remembered a painting she had
once seen of a pearl diver floating beside a coral reef off the coast
of Barra Bantang.  Avaunt loomed over the *Presumption* like that
reef, gray and black in the moonlight.  The braided pines on its
flanks were solemnly indifferent to their passage; a lonely
sickle-wing bat flitted across their path with a sound like crumpling
paper.

Gaeston was the first to speak.  "He'll be missed."

Laeuc nodded heavily.  "He was a good man."

Gaeston shifted on the plank seat.  "What do you think they'll do to
Vurt?"

Laeuc's arm tightened around his daughter's shoulders.  "I don't
know."

"Look on the bright side," Thomas said.  He was sitting at the stern,
one hand on the rudder.  "Fewer of you does mean less chance of being
spotted."

Gaeston's grip tightened on his spear.  "It doesn't bother you at all,
does it?" he said levelly.  "Them being dead."

"Don't say that!" Erileine snapped.  "And don't tell me to shush," she
added to her father, instantly hating herself for sounding petulant.

Thomas jerked his chin at Erileine.  "Look in the cabin, would you?
There's a jar a little larger than your two fists."

Erileine stood, grabbing the bracket atop the boat's small cabin to
steady herself.  The door folded inward in the middle like a book.
She stuck her head inside, blinking in the soft glow of a dayglass
lantern whose cover had been lifted by a string attached to the door.

The cabin's walls were lined with shelves from floor to ceiling.
Boxes, jars, bottles, and books stood side by side, held in place by
fine silk nets.  As she reached for the nearest shelf to steady
himself, a small ceramic turtle tried to hide behind a larger
inanimate one.  "Sh," Erileine said softly.  "I won't hurt you."

When Erileine picked up the jar, it vibrated faintly in her hand.  She
returned to the deck and handed it to Thomas.

"Thank you." Keeping one hand on the rudder, he clamped the jar
between his knees and twisted the lid.  A pair of glowing dots shot
out.

"What in the hells are those?" Gaeston demanded.

"They're from the East Pole," Thomas said as the buzzing points of
light flew away into the night.  "Aren't they marvelous?  They're
drawn to power like bees to nectar.  If anyone's working magic up here
tonight, these little darlings will find them."

With a twitch of his hand, the *Presumption* heeled sharply.  The
Avauntois cursed and grabbed for handholds.  "It would probably best
if you all held onto something for the next little while," Thomas said
without taking his eyes off the receding specks of light.  "I don't
want to lose them."

Thomas had Erileine release another of the magic fireflies a few
minutes later, and another a few minutes after that.  Each flew
straight for the mountain's peak.

*Whoomp!* Somewhere high above them, orange light flared and died.
"Oh saints," Erileine whispered.  She grabbed her father's sleeve.
"It's banefire!  Paere, it's banefire!"

"It most certainly is," Thomas said through gritted teeth.  The
*Presumption* heeled and slowed.

"What are you doing?" Gaeston asked as the boat drifted closer to the
mountain.

"Letting you off," the magician replied shortly.

"What?!"

*Whoomp!* Another burst of fire lit the sky above them.  A moment
later, the acrid tang of burning pine caught inside Erileine's throat.

"I said, I'm letting… you… *off*," Thomas snapped.  "Laeuc, those
branches up ahead–can you throw a tether around them?  Or would you
rather just jump?"

Gaeston stood.  The bow in his hands wasn't quite drawn; the arrow
notched in it wasn't quite pointed at Thomas.  "Tell me we're close,"
he said.  "Tell me this is part of your plan."

"I have no idea whether we're close or not," Thomas snapped.  "But I
am not taking this boat any closer to that mess than it is right now.
Best wishes, good luck, may your grandchildren's grandchildren all
bear your name, and so on."

Gaeston raised his bow.  "Like hell."

Erileine never found out what would have happened next, because
Armaend shouted, "Look!"  She whirled around.  A familiar lean figure
was racing toward them like a leaf blown by a gale.  Moonlight gleamed
off his shaven head as he leaped over a fallen tree, rolled to his
feet, and hurtled onward.

His pursuers burst out of the trees behind him a heartbeat later with
steel in their hands.  One knelt and raised a crossbow.  A branch
above Razi's head whipped aside as the quarrel struck it, but the
bookster kept running.

And then, behind them, a bareheaded man raised his arms and clapped
them together.  *Whoomp!* A ball of fire as big as a house blossomed
in the sky above the fleeing bookster.

"Run!" Erileine screamed.

Razi ran.  He dove face-first down the side of the mountain.
Destruction crashed to the ground a hand's breath behind the soles of
his sandals.  Pine trees exploded as pitch boiled and burst into
flame.  He was already on his feet, still running.

"He's trapped!" Laeuc shouted, pointing.  Dead ahead, the forest ended
at the edge of a cliff.

Erileine spun around.  "Pull in closer!"

The magician held the rudder steady.  "No."

Gaeston raised his bow once again.  "You heard her."

Thomas shook his head.  "They'll kill us all."

For a moment, Gaeston didn't move, then– "No!" Erileine shouted, as
Gaeston lowered his bow.  Without thinking, she threw herself at
Thomas.  Her shoulder hit him in the chest.  He cursed and grabbed a
guyline to save himself from falling.

Erileine threw her weight onto the rudder.  The *Presumption* tilted
sharply.  Donaien's spear clattered to the deck as he grabbed the
gunwale with one hand and Armaend with the other.

Twenty strides, ten, five–just as Razi threw himself over the cliff,
Thomas pulled Erileine out of the steering seat.  "Idiot!" he shouted,
yanking the rudder as the boat's starboard side scraped against the
mountain.

*Thud!* Razi hit the sail and fell to the deck.

"Oh hells," Gaeston swore.  Erileine whirled around.  Standing at the
top of the cliff, the Hett magician raised his hands and brought them
together.

*Whoomp!* Banefire fell toward them.  Erileine screamed as it splashed
against something invisible above the mast.  A roiling mass of flame
poured around them and past them and then fell away behind them as the
*Presumption* fled into the night.

"Razi!" Erileine knelt beside the bookster and shook him.  "Razi, wake
up.  Wake up!"

The bookster groaned and put a hand on his head.  "Ouch."  He squeezed
his eyes shut, then opened them and looked up at Erileine.  "*La*,
that was well timed."

Whatever Erileine would have said next was cut off by a low moan from
the stern.  "No.  No no no no…" Thomas was staring down in horror at
his coat, whose vibrant ever-changing patterns had stilled and dulled

Razi sat up unsteadily.  "*La*, knocking the fire aside–that was your
doing?" He clasped his hands in front of his chest and bowed his head.
"I am grateful for your sacrifice."

"Damn your gratitude." Tears glistened on the magician's cheeks.

"Oh, get over it," Gaeston said gruffly.  "It was just a fancy coat."

The bookster and the magician turned to look at him.  "No," Razi said
softly.  "No, it wasn't."

---

"We traveled underground," the bookster said as the *Presumption* flew
through the night.  The Hett had taken him through tunnels as busy as
an anthill, intending perhaps for him to tell Lady Kembe and the rest
of the world just how pointless it would be to fight them.  Entire
families were scraping the accumulated muck of centuries off the
walls, repairing ancient clockwork, building chicken coops and forges,
all in preparation for whatever was to come next.

Razi didn't tell them how he had escaped, or where the fresh cut on
his left cheek had come from.  But as he buckled his sword bottle
around his *deel*, he confirmed what Thomas had said: the Hett were
starting their Great Work with a ceremony at the mountain's peak that
night.

"Not much we can do about it now, is there?" Thomas said venomously.
"After our little adventure back there, they'll have a hundred eyes on
the sky."

"Get us into the tunnels," Razi said, almost gently.  "We'll do the
rest."

FIXME: get them to the tunnels.

"There," Razi said, pointing.  "That one." For a moment all Erileine
saw as the cliff, but then the darker patch directly ahead resolved
into a shape too regular to be natural.

Gaeston crouched in the bow as Thomas edged the *Presumption* closer.
"A little more, a little more… Right." He stepped onto the gunwale and
into the tunnel mouth.  Steadying himself with one hand, he grabbed
the rope Donaien tossed him, then pulled it taut to draw the
*Presumption*'s bowsprit closer.

The boat swayed slightly as the Avauntois made their way forward one
by one.  When Erileine's turn came, her father said, "Erileine?"

"I'm not staying behind," she said defiantly.

"I know," Laeuc said.  "I was just going to say, I'm proud of you."

Erileine swung her legs over the side.  Her boots slipped on the
time-smooth stone–they kept wanting to slide into the crook of the
sharp vee between the tilted wall and floor.

Donaien, Armaend, and Gaeston were already putting on their climbing
harnesses by the light of their hand lamps.  "Here," Laeuc said,
handing Erileine the bosun's harness.  "Tighten it all the way."

Razi coiled the rope and tossed it back into the bow.  The
*Presumption* drifted away slowly until the wind bellied her sails and
Thomas put his weight to the rudder.  He didn't wave goodbye; neither
did the Avauntois.

Gaeston spat on the tunnel floor.  "We can't let him have the stone.
You know that, don't you?"

Laeuc nodded.  "I know." He looked at Donaien and Armaend, who nodded
in turn.

"Wish the bosun was here," Armaend said.

Gaeston grunted.  "Or the dragon." He eyed the bookster.  "Have to do,
I suppose.  Which way?"

In answer, Razi held up Thomas's jar of fireflies.  He twisted the lid
to let a single blue-green dot escape.  It zoomed into the tunnel.
Without a word Gaeston followed it, the others falling in behind.

The tunnel ended in a tee thirty strides later.  One arm dropped to
their left; the other rose to their right.  Two rusty iron rails lay
on what had been the tunnel's floor.  When Razi released another
firefly, it shot up the shaft to their right.

Gaeston set his feet against the rail, one above the other, and braced
himself against the wall.  With his lamp hung on his belt, he started
up the tunnel, toe-heeling his feet as he walked his hands forward on
the tilted wall.

Erileine had to stretch, but she could reach.  Her arms and legs
ached, then burned, then settled into the dull weariness brought on by
hard labor that has no end in sight.  The moist air made her shirt
stick to her like a moldy leaf.

Wondering how much further it could be, she leaned sideways to see
past Gaeston.  As she did so, her foot slipped.  "Whoa!" she
exclaimed, sliding down the shaft.

Laeuc grabbed her pant leg as he went by.  Erileine found herself
hanging upside down on her back.  "*La*, are you all right?" Razi
asked.

"I'm fine," Erileine lied.  She was upside down in a dark tunnel,
inside a mountain flying only the saints knew where, on her way to
steal a magic stone from an invading army.  "I'm fine."

She moved more carefully after that.  When she reached the horizontal
passage at the top of the shaft she collapsed, panting.  One by one
the others joined her.

Finally Gaeston clambered to his feet and took the two halves of his
spear from his pack.  Screwing the haft together, he picked up his
lantern once again and set off.  Behind him, the others followed suit.

A hundred strides, two… Erileine had no idea what time it was, what
direction they were heading, or what they would do when they got
there.  "Steal the stone" was even less of a plan than the heroes in
stories usually had.

Gaeston stopped abruptly and raised his hand.  Something rumbled in
the distance.  "Right," he whispered.  "Armaend, Laeuc, bows out.
Donaien, you're with me.  Bookster, you–hells, you do whatever you
want."

Erileine pressed herself against the tilted wall to let the grown-ups
pass.  There was a slight breeze, barely enough to stir Erileine's
hair, but it smelled faintly of oil and wet cinders.

The passage opened onto a room tilted at the same disquieting angle as
everything else inside the mountain.  "*La*, allow me," the bookster
said.  He drew something from inside his *deel* and threw it against
the floor.  It tinkled like breaking glass and started to glow.

"Hoy," Erileine breathed.  The room was enormous–the Captain's House
would fit into it with room left over for a sizeable garden.  The only
break in the polished walls was a square opening opposite them,
identical to the one they had just come through.

They were halfway to it when a whistle blew.  "Run!" Gaeston shouted
needlessly.  Voices shouted behind them.  Erileine glanced over her
shoulder.  Soldiers in steel helmets were spilling out of the tunnel
behind them.

"*Forchem!*" a voice commanded!  *Thwack!  Thwack!* Crossbow quarrels
whistled past Erileine's ears.

Razi reached the opposite passage first.  He spun around, shouting,
"Through, through!" as Gaeston and Donaien followed, then Laeuc, and
then Armaend–but no, Armaend was down, tugging weakly at the crossbow
bolt in his side before going limp.

"Armaend!" Donaien shouted.  "Armaend!"  He raised his spear and
charged at the oncoming soldiers.

Erileine skidded to a halt.  Her father grabbed her arm.  "Come on!"
he shouted, pulling her on.  They fled down the corridor ten strides
behind the others.  Left, right, right again, to a stairway half over
on its side.

Razi stopped at the top.  "Make ready," he said quietly.

"What?"

"He means get your damn bow up," Gaeston hissed, tightening his grip
on his spear.  Laeuc nodded jerkily and raised his bow.

Three Hett came around the corner.  They were only ten strides
away–there was no way Laeuc could miss the first one, or Razi the
second.  The third one ran at the point of Gaeston's spear, swinging
his sword to knock it aside, but Gaeston dropped the point and thrust.
He twisted the spear to follow the Hett down, then yanked it free.

Just that quickly, it was over.  Laeuc lowered his bow, then handed it
to to Erileine, turned, and threw up.

---

FIXME: get them the rest of the way

Erileine gasped and clutched at the doorframe.  She had thought the
last room was big…

They were standing on a balcony the size of Starboard Town.  The
downward tilt of the floor made Erileine feel like she was falling
into space.  Below them lay a huge stone amphitheatre.  Its floor was
a maze of carved stone benches, waist-high walls, free-standing doors,
and heavy sculptures that reminded Erileine of the pictures children
drew of monsters.  Globes of dayglass bigger than any piece Erileine
had ever seen blazed yellow-white here and there.

And overhead, the pyramid on the mountain's peak was opening like a
flower.

"There," Razi said, pointing.  A flat-topped pyramid, identical in
shape to the one on the peak, stood in the center of the amphitheatre.
The Hett had built a wooden stage around it to give themselves a level
floor.  Their boots drummed on its planks as they hurried back and
forth between the strange machines that surrounded it.

An eerie blue light rose from one of the machines like steam from a
kettle.  A face, ten times larger than life and too narrow to be
human, suddenly appeared above another, its mouth open as if to laugh
or scream, then vanished.  As it did so, the rumbling suddenly
stopped.

Razi cursed.  "We must find stairs," he said.

Gaeston caught his sleeve.  "It'll be faster to climb.  Here." Handing
his spear to Razi, he slipped the coil of rope off his shoulder and
knotted it around the balcony's stone railing.

"Will it take your weight?" Laeuc asked.

Gaeston shrugged.  "Only one way to find out, isn't there?" He swung
himself over.

A minute later, the four of them stood together on the amphitheatre's
tilted floor.  Ahead and below, the Hett hurried about their work.

"La, we have company," Razi whispered, pointing.  Four soldiers were
marching toward the center stage.  Sitting upright on the sedan chair
they carried was a middle-aged man in a plain gray uniform.  He swayed
slightly with the chair's motion, but looked neither right nor left.

Gaeston tightened his grip on his spear.  "One of their magicians?"

Razi nodded.  "Just so.  And *la*, do you see over there?  I think
they are the others." Two more sedan chairs stood empty next to the
wooden stage.  A uniformed woman with her hair pulled back in a severe
white bun was being helped down from a third.  She kept one hand on
the shoulder of the soldier helping her as he led her over to where
two others were standing.

Gaeston made a sound in his throat.  "They blind?"

"*La*, not the soldiers," Razi said grimly.  "There are more of them
than I had hoped."

"Well, I didn't come all this way just to watch them do whatever the
weeping hells they're going to do!"

"Sh." Razi raised a warning hand.  "Blind is not deaf.  I only meant,
we cannot simply attack them.  They would reap us like wheat."

"So what do we do?" Laeuc asked.

Razi pointed at the arched doorway the sedan chair had come through.
"If their magicians came from Forecastle, then the stone should come
the same route.  Perhaps there will be fewer guarding it than there
are here."

"And then?"

Razi shrugged eloquently.

They hurried toward the stage, bent nearly double to hide behind the
stone pews and statues.  *Thummmmm…* Two more machines lit up, one
purple, the other green.  They were the colors of the week, Erileine
realized.  Red, yellow–one machine for each.

In the center of the stage, Hett soldiers lifted the lid off a bulky
crate.  Quickly but carefully, they levered its walls apart and
cleared away matted straw to reveal a statue of a man with ram's horns
curled on the sides of his head.

"Saints and their mercies," Razi whispered.  "Oh, *la*, saints, if you
have ever guided us, guide us now."

"What is it?" Laeuc asked, but the bookster was already two strides
away, as light on his feet as a tiger on the hunt.

Around a wall, through a door, past a statue of a bear with bat wings
and a snake for a tail, up two stairs and down two more…  With every
step, Erileine was afraid one of the Hett would look their way, but
none did.

A fourth machine came to life, adding orange to the swirling light.
They were a hundred strides from the entrance the Hett wizard had come
through.  Eighty, fifty, twenty…

Razi pulled up short as a squad of soldiers marched into the room,
followed by a second and a third.  A gray-haired man, his face
half-drowned by a heavy beard, followed them, and was in turn followed
by three more squads.

In his hands, the man held a polished marble casket.  Erileine's heart
sank.  It had to be the Pilot Stone, but there were almost fifty
soldiers around it.  There was no way they could–

Razi stood and pitched three blue vials at the soldiers.  Even before
they hit the floor he was running, his quicksilver sword in his hand.

*Crack!* *Crack!* *Crack!* Darkness billowed up from the shattered
vials.  As it engulfed the bookster, Laeuc sent an arrow whistling
through the air at the nearest soldier.  "Could have weeping told us!"
Gaeston snarled, stepping into guard position as Laeuc drew another
arrow from the quiver on his hip.

"Erileine!" Laeuc shouted.  "Get behind us!" But his daughter was
already running toward the inky cloud that had swallowed the bookster.

She held her breath, expecting smoke, but the darkness had no more
taste or smell than a shadow.  Metal clanged on metal ahead of her.  A
cry for aid was suddenly cut off.

She banged his shin hard against something as her father shouted her
name again.  What had she been thinking?  She couldn't help Razi–she
didn't even know where he was.

Suddenly she slipped on something wet.  "Oof!" She fell clumsily to
the floor.

"*Ashenope!  Ashenope arra te paurenatepe ejo!*" Someone grabbed her
hand, holding tight when she tried to pull away, and pushed something
heavy into her arms.

Smooth, heavy, and cool to the touch…  She ran her hands over it,
already knowing what they would tell her.  Angled sides, rounded
corners, a flat top: it was the casket the Hett had been carrying.  It
was the Pilot Stone.

The darkness cleared a moment later to reveal a scene of confusion.
Razi was on his knees, his hands behind his head, one crossbow against
his back, another pointed at his chest.  The hilt of his sword lay
just out of reach in a pool of mercury.  Three men lay in pools of
their own blood beside him.  A fourth man–the one with the beard–had
just breathed his last in a similar pool beside Erileine.

Ten strides away, Gaeston and Laeuc looked at the circle of Hett
soldiers around them and lowered their weapons.  "But I'm damned if
I'll kneel," Gaeston spat.

A bald Hett with four ribbons tied around his sleeve led one of the
iron-eyed magicians down from the stage and over to Razi.  "*Auedje ne
atarappa paurenatepe ke fe iuadje te?*" she demanded coldly.

Razi smiled politely.  "*La*, my apologies, but I don't speak–"

"Yes you do," the Hett magician said in Avauntois.  "Where is it?"

Razi shrugged without taking his hands from his head.  "I swear, I do
not know."

"All right." She pointed at the two Avauntois.  "Pick one."

"*La*, you have no call to murder those men." Razi said.

"Murder?" The Hett laughed angrily.  "You talk to me of murder?  How
many men have you killed tonight?"

"I regret that," the bookster replied calmly.  "Truly, I do."

"Tell it to their families," the Hett snarled.  She stabbed an angry
finger at Razi.  "I am tired of my people dying, do you understand
that?  I am tired of people who have done no harm in this world being
beaten by drunks, or driven from their homes by mobs, or robbed blind
by petty lordlings who know that no one will defend them.  Your
mistress has done nothing to help us–nothing!–and neither has anyone
else, so now we are going to help ourselves."

"I grieve for your wounds," Razi said.  "But please, what you are
doing here–it will not help you.  It will not help anyone."

"Yes it will," she said coldly.  "It will stop us from ever being
helpless victims again.  Now, where is the stone?"

Razi said nothing.  The woman's jaw tightened.  "Very well.  Colonel!
That one." She pointed at Laeuc.

The soldier who had led her over to Razi snapped a salute.  Sword in
hand, he walked ten paces across the tilted stone floor to stand
beside Erileine's father.

"I will ask you once more," she said softly.  "Or twice, if need be.
And then it will be your turn."

Razi looked up at her steadily.  "As you will."

She raised her arm.  The Hett soldier brought his sword up.

"No!" Erileine shouted.  The magician whirled around.  Twenty strides
away, Erileine raised the fist-sized piece of crystal she had taken
from the casket over her head.  "Let him go, or I'll smash it!"

The soldier glanced at the magician.  She shook her head.  "*Neh.*"

"I'll do it!" Erileine shouted.  "I swear on my blood, I will!"

The magician laughed.  "Go ahead.  But I swear on my blood, if you do,
there will be nothing left of Starboard Town but ashes when the sun
comes up."

The moment stretched and stretched.  Laeuc gurgled as the soldier
pressed his sword a hair's weight harder against his throat.  "Don't
you weeping dare," Gaeston growled.

Erileine looked at Razi.  The bookster's calm, clear eyes held hers.
He didn't nod, or shake his head–he just waited.

Erileine sagged.  "All right," she said, lowering the stone in defeat.

As the soldiers stepped forward, Razi lashed out with his foot.  The
blow caught the magician in the ribs, knocking her backward.  Razi
snatched up the hilt of his sword and slashed at the nearest soldier.

Who flinched, and then laughed.  "*Teppate me peua netahante adj
auje,*" he said, pointing at the pool of quicksilver that still lay on
the floor.

"*La*, I suppose not," Razi said.  He lunged at the soldier–

–and collapsed like a puppet whose strings had been cut.  The magician
lowered her arm.  "*Ede ebpeten,*" she said coldly.

Rough hands dragged Erileine to the stage and pushed her to her knees
beside her father and Gaeston.  A limp Razi hit the planks with a thud
a moment later.

"Now watch," the magician said.  "Watch, so that your mistress will
know not to meddle here again." She took the stone from the soldier
holding it and walked across the stage to the pyramid.

The lights above the strange machines on the stage throbbed purple and
blue, green and yellow, orange and deep red.  The magician joined the
others in a circle around the ram-horned statue.

Erileine could hear the machines now.  They were singing to each
other, great long notes that ran from bone-tingling bass to fluting
whistles that made his ears ring.  The air tingled as the light folded
around itself and became a shining emptiness too bright to understand.
The magicians chanted in time with the machines' rhythmic pulse.

And then the Pilot Stone began to shine.  It wasn't too hot, or too
bright: it was too *real*.  Erileine threw up her arm to cover her
face, but the light shone right through her–right through the whole
world.

As one, the magicians on the stage cried out.  Erileine lowered her
arm just in time to see the light sucked into the top of the statue's
head, like smoke being inhaled.

The statue opened its eyes and tilted its head to one side.
«Finally.» The word appeared inside Erileine's head like a sliver of
ice dropped into a pool of water.  Its eyes were steel marbles,
Erileine noticed, dazed.  Even without that, and the horns coiled on
either side of its head where its ears should have been, and its
hairlessness, and the complete lack of anything male or female between
its legs, it still wouldn't have passed for human.  It was too
perfect.

"*Aya!  Aya!  Aya!*" the Hett shouted.  "It is done!  It is done!  It
is done!"

"My lord." Tears ran down the Hett magician's face, but her voice was
strong.  "My lord, welcome.  Welcome back."

«Who are these?» The statue's thought took in Razi and the Avauntois.

"Unhearing ones, my lord.  They tried to prevent your return."

«They failed.»

"Yes, my lord.  Do you wish them returned to the earth?"

«No.» The statue slowly swept its gaze around the chamber, taking in
the now-silent machines, the awestruck Hett, and the silent, watchful
balconies.  «This place is a mess.»

"Yes, my lord."

«It needs mending.»

"Yes, my lord." The magician's voice was exultant.

«This world is damaged.» Each word came perfectly formed into
Erileine's mind.  «As is this ship.  All needs mending.  There are
deserts where there should be gardens.  The moon strays from its
course.»

"Slow poisons rot the heart of the world." The Hett magician spoke the
words aloud in time with the statue.  Others joined in, some weeping
with joy.  "The ocean drains away and monsters roam free.  We must
mend what is broken."

«We must mend what is broken.» the statue agreed.  Its steel gaze fell
on the Avauntois.  «Go tell the world.  The Great Work begins.»

One moment they were standing in the heart of the mountain.  The next,
they were on Slip Street outside the gate of the Captain's House.
"Hoy!" Gaeston grabbed the gate to steady himself.

"Was that…  Was that a Pilot?" Erileine asked in awe.  Razi nodded.

"But they're dead!"

Razi shrugged.  "Not any more."

Anything else he might have said was cut off as the ground lurched.
Slowly but inexorably, the mountain began to turn over.

*Here ends the first part of The Fall of the Flying Mountain.*
