Erileine's legs were aching by the time they crested the spur of rock
called the Cripple's Shoulder to find Forecastle spread out below
them.  He had been disappointed the first time he saw Avaunt's
capitol---it had seemed small compared to the cities he had looked
down on from his grandfather's verandah.  But then his father had led
him down the last half-gallop of road, and the realness of it had
taken his breath away.  It wasn't a picture in a book, or a map, or a
giant's toy on the ground a gallop below.  It was a bustling,
prosperous town.  A few goats nipped at rooftop moss, ignoring the
smoke that rose from the chimneys around them, while chickens cackled
in wicker coops against the side of every second house, but that was
where the resemblance to Starboard Town ended.  Starboard Town's homes
didn't have glass windows.  Its shops didn't have banners strung
proudly over their doors proclaiming the quality of the wares within.
And if Starboard Towners wore silk, it was just an accent laid over
plain cotton, not a whole shirt or a broad, brightly-colored skirt.

Forecastle Road's last half-gallop wound through a pine tree
plantation.  Thin smears of black smoke rose from charcoaling sheds on
either side.  A handful of arborists stripping bark off
recently-felled trees waved to the Starboard Towners.  One, a young
woman with her hair pulled back in a thick club, set her root drill on
the ground and trotted over to say hello to the bosun.  He waved his
companions on.  "I'll catch up with you," he said to knowing grins
from Laeuc and a few others.

The forest ended abruptly a few minutes later.  Thirty strides away,
on the other side of the firebreak, brick and timber buildings lined
cart-wide streets that turned back on themselves like tangled yarn.
Here, the afternoon sun turned a carp pond silver.  There, a vanity
garden tumbled down a wall, rank upon rank of flowers standing bright
and proud in defiance of the impending drought.

The travelers dispersed the moment they arrived, some to visit family,
others hurrying straight to particular shops.  The Forecastlers who
greeted them seemed cheerful enough, but the second thing out of their
mouths was invariably, "We don't know either."  The third was usually,
"You won't like the price." In the two and a half days since the
mountain had changed course, people had been buying all the flour,
smoked cheese, and dried fruit they could find.  Candles, too, and
cotton for bandages, and jars for storing water.  Prices had gone up
like kites in a strong wind.

"Everyone got all panicky," an old woman grumbled when Laeuc,
Erileine, and the bookster stopped to look at the preserves she was
selling.  Her expression was as dark as the blackberry stains on her
fingers.  "What's happening, where are we going, what if the water
runs out, on and on and on.  Feh." She spat the gooey remains of the
cinnamon bark she'd been chewing into a cracked mug.  "The Hett got
right onto it too, of course.  That Klaues fellow, he was in Market
Square in a heartbeat, splashing silver around and tossing what-not
into his wheelbarrow while everyone else was still picking themselves
up."

"Didn't the captain do anything?" Laeuc asked.

She made a face.  "Kind of like asking whether your fingers'll do
something about your thumb, isn't it? But you mark me---things keep
going on like this, the captain'll have to do something whether he
wants to or not."

Whether he wants to or not...  It had never occurred to Erileine that
people could ever force the captain to do something.  The thought felt
as strange as someone else's shoes...

She nearly bumped into her father when Laeuc pulled up short outside a
glasswright's to greet a familiar balding man with a broad smile on
his face, a baby on his hip, and a bundle of cured brown bamboo under
his arm.  "Regi! Clear day to you too.  Bookster, this is my brother
Reginael.  Regi, this is Bookster Razi, Erileine's master.  And who's
this? Oh, now, you can't be Annanette, can you?  When did you get to
be so big, eh?"

Razi caught Erileine's eye and smiled as Laeuc made faces at the
wide-eyed baby girl.  Erileine fidgeted from foot to foot until she
could take it no more.  "Paere? Can we...?"

"Hm?  Oh, of course." Laeuc tousled his daughter's hair fondly.  "You
go ahead, and I'll se you at the Green Pig at sundown.  Do you
remember how to get to there? Are you sure? No, don't scowl, I'm just
asking."

"I'm not scowling." Erileine scowled. "Do you want me to get
anything?"

"How about something for Que√ßenne?  No more than a quarter bezel,
though.  And not a hair ribbon," he added hastily.

Erileine and Razi left Laeuc making faces at his chubby-cheeked niece.
The bookster seemed to be in no hurry, and Erileine was happy to amble
along beside him.  Here and there, people had built rooms right over
the street, joining houses on opposite sides to create arches.
Mountain swallows whistled at frustrated cats from stick-and-mud nests
on the undersides.  Erileine heard a snatch of Uwsian (at least, she
thought it was Uwsian) from two pale-skinned men arguing amicably on a
bench outside a chocolate seller's.  A dozen strides further on, an
old woman with nimble fingers made a marionette dance and tumble,
nodding solemn thanks every time a coin clinked into the tray at her
feet.  So what if there weren't many kites in the sky as there were
over Starboard Town, or if some of the cobblestones needed weeding,
and some of the narrow alleys they passed smelled of damp garbage?  It
seemed that Forecastle had something new to show her every time they
turned the corner.

Drumlurch Street led to Three Bees Alley, which opened onto a third
street whose name Erileine didn't know that took them up a steep
flight of stairs built against the side of a warehouse past a
barber's, a loom mender's, and a prosperous little Bantangui-style tea
house where chili merchants bought, sold, and speculated day and night
when the mountain was on the ground.

As they rounded yet another corner, Razi said, "*La*, is that not the
bosun?"

Erileine grinned.  "I guess he has a lot of people to talk to." At
that particular moment, Uyves was talking to another young woman, one
whose almond eyes and long fingers showed Bantangui ancestry.  He
nodded at something she said and touched her arm lightly in farewell.

"Hoa!" He jumped slightly when he turned to find Razi and Erileine
standing behind him.  "Well, there you are," he said to Razi.  "I was
wondering where everyone had gone."

"*La*, to market, I believe.  That is why we came, is it not?" the
bookster replied blandly.

Uyves grinned.  "Well then, lead on."

The market lay in the center of town under the watchful gaze of a
sprawling, turreted building called the Hardeck.  The captain's clerks
and mates had their offices on its bottom two floors, while the
captain himself lived on the third, in a suite of rooms that were
supposed to be as richly decorated as the king's own chambers in
Gandan.  Gazing at the Hardeck's gray slate roof, Erileine wondered
where the captain was at that very moment.  Standing in front of the
famous window in the Grand Hall, watching the world roll by? Or
sitting at a desk somewhere, reading reports and writing orders? *I
wonder if he knows about Fraederiq?* Erileine thought, suddenly guilty
that she hadn't thought of him since they arrived.

The market itself was as busy as a goat pen at shearing time.  People
from Portside and Aft Landing jostled against second cousins from
Forecastle and Starboard Landing, all of them filling their bags with
anything that wouldn't spoil.  "Five sequins for a jar of plums!"
Erileine said to Razi, scandalized, when the bosun stopped to clasp
hands with someone Erileine didn't know.  "My maere would have a dog!"

Razi shook his head.  "*Masa il-kutna duttaqun as saa.* Have I taught
you that yet? It is Karabandi.  It means, fill your water jars, a
storm is coming."

Erileine looked around.  No one was smiling.  Everyone's voice had an
edge---not the customary mock-scandalized market-day edge, but
something harsher.  He suddenly remembered his papaere's stories about
his teacher, who had lived through the siege of Armaq.  "Once the last
of the cats were gone, people ate rats," Vurt told his wide-eyed
granddaughter one evening when Erileine's parents were safely out of
earshot.  "And when the rats were gone, they ate each other, one
mouthful at a time..."

"You think there's going to be a storm?" the bosun asked, having heard
only the bookster's last few words.

"*La*, perhaps when we reach the mountains," Razi replied.  "If we
have to go higher to get over them, would we not---*teh!*" Without
warning, he lunged forward to catch a grimy collar.

"Ow!" A small figure struggled furiously, trying to slip out of the
oversized coat the bookster had caught.  "Let go of me!"

"Oy, what's going on here?" the bosun asked.

"I didn't do anything! He just grabbed me! Stinking groundling! Let
go!"  The boy Razi had grabbed was a head shorter than Erileine, his
curly dark hair hacked short below his ears.  His grimy coat was two
sizes too large for him, but his waxed Bantangui sailing trousers left
a handspan of bare copper-colored ankle above his split-seamed shoes.

Razi shook him.  "*La*, not until you give the nice gentleman his
wallet back, yes?"

The bosun patted his coat.  "Hoy!"

The bookster pushed the boy in front of the bosun.  "It is in his left
pocket."

Stony-faced, the bosun slapped the boy's hands out of the way and
pulled his wallet out of the boy's coat.  "I didn't do it!"  he
yelped.  "He put it there! Stinking wormy---"

"Quiet!" the bosun bellowed, red-faced.  People around them stared at
the scene, some grinning, some tsk'ing under their breath.

The boy subsided, glaring.  The bosun took his collar from Razi.
"Thank you, bookster.  I'm sure the captain will want to have a word
with our little ragtagger."

Without warning, the boy bent double and pulled his arms free from his
jacket.  As he darted away, Erileine instinctively stuck out her foot.

"Ooph!" Down he went.  The bosun pounced on him.  "Let go of me, you
sock-clutching bent-masted..." His stream of curses set the people
nearby laughing.

Not the bosun, though.  Erileine thought steam was going to start
coming out of his ears.  "Right," he said grimly, "If you want to play
the goat..." He pulled a twist of cord out of his pocket and twisted
the boy's arms behind her back.  "There? Happy now?" he asked as he
tied the boy's wrists together.

He glared at him, then at Razi, and then spat at Erileine's feet.
Muttering under his breath, the bosun pushed him toward the Hardeck.
"Come on," he said over his shoulder.

"*La*, that was well done," Razi said approvingly.

"Thanks," Erileine muttered.  If she had moved that quickly two days
before, Fraederiq might still be alive...

Instead of marching his prisoner up the broad steps that led to the
Hardeck's front doors, the bosun half-dragged him to a smaller door
that stood in a shadowed recess at ground level.  When he yanked the
dangling cord, a drum thubbed inside.

"Prisoner for charge," he told the uniformed guard who opened the door
a moment later, pushing the boy inside ahead of him.  Erileine and
Razi followed them.

Erileine had never realized that arresting someone involved so much
writing.  Even Razi's patient smile eventually grew forced.  "*La*,
you would think we were in Thind," he muttered as the clerk scribbled
in yet another ledger.

"Sorry," the clerk said unapologetically, handing the ledger book to
Bosun Uyves to sign.  "Procedures, you know.  Must say, I'm glad we
don't have to go through this very often when we're in the air.  At
least, we didn't until this one started showing up."

The bosun looked up.  "You know him?"

The clerk sighed theatrically.  "Oh yes.  I doubt another night in the
dungeon will scare any sense into him, but we'll give it a try.  Thank
you.  Now, can you initial here and here, please?"

Erileine glanced at the boy, who was sitting on a stool in the corner
of the cold stone room with his hands still tied behind his back and
his coat on the floor beside him.  She hadn't known the Hardeck *had*
a dungeon.  He didn't look as though the thought of spending a night
in it scared him.  He looked as if he wanted to bite someone's head
off.

The clerk inked a round stamp and rolled it carefully across the
bosun's signature.  "I think, yes, that should be everything.  No, a
moment, there's---no, no, that's all.  Thank you, bosun." He stood and
nodded.  "Now, you said you wanted to speak to the captain? Yes? Good.
He should be upstairs.  You know the way?"

* * *

The captain was indeed upstairs---three flights of polished granite
stairs, to be exact.  The brass handrail beside them had been worn
shiny-smooth by generations of hands.  Clerks in blue jackets bustled
past the trio from Starboard Town, squawking "shortage" and
"inventory" to one another like strange flightless birds.

Erileine was so busy gawking at the tapestries on the walls and the
statues frowning sternly between them that she stumbled on every tenth
step.  Most of the tapestries were brightly-painted silk from Ini
Bantang and Barra Bantang, though some had faded with age---great age,
she thought, gazing at a bird's-eye view of what could only be the
sunken city of Plange.

"Quite the sight, isn't it?" Bosun Uyves said proudly.

Erileine nodded.  "What's that one?" he asked, pointing.

The bosun shrugged cheerfully.  "Not a clue.  Bookster?"

Razi studied the tapestry.  Glass windows stretched from head-height
to the ceiling at regular intervals, but even so, the building's
interior was growing dim as evening approached.  "The Parliament of
Whales, I believe.  Not bad work." He gestured at the one next to it.
"This, on the other hand, is Ossisswean.  See here? The squares in the
corner? *La*, those are the painter's sign.  It is bad luck to put
one's name on someone else's image, so portraitists mark their work
after this fashion.  Now, you notice the way the subject's hands are
clasped in front of his chest? In a formal portrait such as this---"

The bosun cleared his throat noisily.  "Sorry, bookster, but you'd
best save the lesson for some other time.  Wouldn't want to keep the
captain waiting."

Despite his own words, the bosun still paused for a few moments at the
top of the stairs to straighten his jacket and run his fingers through
his hair before thumping the little door drum.  "Enter," a deep voice
said.

"Oh..." Erileine gasped.  They were in the Grand Hall---the *Grand
Hall*.  One entire wall was a single enormous window.  Below it, the
Hardeck dropped vertically to the steep cliff that formed the
mountain's leading edge.  The great window curved slightly, so if you
stood close to its center and looked straight ahead, you saw nothing
except sky.

Paintings from all over Cherne covered the room's rear wall.  Delicate
yet indestructible ruins from the time of the Pilots, the sun rising
over a glacier in Anuvatik, tigers and courtiers in mirrored masks
listening to music on board a palace barge in Thind...  If Erileine
had looked more closely, she would have realized that none of them
showed Gandan, Mau Ngapcha, or anywhere else the mountain flew over.
Generations of captains had collected pictures of scenes they never
thought to see out their front window.

"Good afternoon, bosun." Erileine jumped.  She hadn't noticed the two
men standing in the corner.

The bosun saluted, nudging Erileine with his elbow to do likewise.
"Good afternoon, *sra*."

The captain returned the salute sharply.  He was stocky and
broad-shouldered, older than Erileine's paere but younger than Papaere
Vurt.  What was left of his close-cropped hair was shot through with
gray, and the wrinkles at the corners of his eyes had been etched by
the sun and endless, patient argument.

The man beside him was taller and lighter, with blue-gray eyes and a
neat mustache.  His high-collared knee-length jacket and trousers were
simply cut, but absorbed the light in a way that hinted at expensive
fabric and fine tailoring, and the lines on his face had been put
there by a lifetime of smiling.

The captain gestured at the paintings.  "I was just asking Klaues what
he thought the odds were that the next captain would have to hang
pictures of Gandan Berth and Mau Ngapcha up there some day.  Any
thoughts on that, bosun?"

"None, *sra*," Uyves said.  "Afternoon, Klaues.  Been arrested
lately?"

The Hett smiled.  "Six days a week, bosun, six days a week.  Any
chance you'll have time for another game of cards this trip? I
wouldn't mind a chance to get some of my sequins back."

"Plans made, I'm afraid," the bosun replied affably.

The captain cleared his throat.  "I understand you had some excitement
on the way here?"

"Just a little ragtagger, *sra*.  The bookster snagged him, not me."

"Mm." The captain cocked an eyebrow at Razi.  "Anything I should
concern myself with?"

The bookster turned his hands palms-up.  "*La*, your clerk was
pondering a night in the dungeons and some scrubbing of cobblestones."

The captain snorted.  "Bucket full of good that's done in the past.
Anyway, I'm glad you've come---there's a few things I'd like to ask
you.  If you'll follow me?  Bosun, you are of course welcome to join
us."

Bosun Uyves cleared his throat.  "Thank you, *sra*, but with your
permission, I *do* have some other matters I'd like to look in on
while I'm here"

Erileine saw Klaues stifle a smile as the captain said, "Of course.
Go finish your, um, rounds."

"Thank you, *sra*." The bosun saluted once again and left, humming
softly.

Razi and Erileine followed the captain and Klaues through a side door
to a normal-sized room with normal-sized windows, a low Bantangui
table, and comfortable chairs.  Very comfortable chairs, Erileine
thought, sinking into one moments after the three adults.  She climbed
Slip Street a dozen times every day, but even so, the long walk from
Starboard Town had worn her out.  She wondered if there'd be time to
visit a steam bath before dinner.  *Probably not*, she decided
regretfully.

There was chocolate, though.  An old man in a spotless blue jacket
poured for them and left.  The captain and Klaues picked theirs up and
blew on them gently, but Razi ignored his, so Erileine left hers alone
as well.

"So," the captain said.  "Bookster.  I don't suppose you've turned up
anything that might be of use?"

Razi spread his hands apologetically.  "*La*, not so much as I had
hoped.  I did find an account from Anuvatik of a stone boat that
sailed to the moon and back.  The author---she doesn't give her own
name, but from the style, I would guess her to have been from
Vaarda---said that the boat made the journey several times before
disappearing."

The captain drummed his fingers on the arm of his chair.  "Hm.  What
do you think of it?"

Razi sighed.  "To be honest, I rather suspect it was just a traveler's
tale about Avaunt grown garbled with time and distance.  As I have
been telling my apprentice, being written does not make a thing true."

"I wish more people shared your scepticism," Klaues said regretfully.
"Here.  Have these shown up in Starboard Town yet?"

He took a sheet of cheap gray paper from his pocket and passed it to
Razi.  Erileine craned her neck to look.  The printing was rough and
slightly smeared, but the message was plain.  "The Committee of
Twenty-Nine," Razi read aloud.  "Because there are twenty-nine of
them?"

"Question twenty-nine from the last Debates," the captain grunted.
"About how many Hett should be allowed on the mountain."

"They've gone further this time," Klaues said quietly.  "No Hett on
the mountain at all."

Razi stroked his chin with his fingertips.  "Will they have the voices
they need?"

The Hett shrugged.  "Who can say? Four days ago, I would have said we
had left this behind us.  Now? Two of my nephews have had stones
thrown at them in the streets.  Somehow, people seem to think that
what happened on Orangeday is our doing." He laughed.  "It apparently
hasn't occurred to them that if we have magic enough to move the
mountain off its path, throwing stones at us would be less than wise."

"And speaking of magic..." The captain steepled his hands under his
chin.  "Do you know a magician named Thomas?"

Razi smiled broadly.  "Of course! Do you also?"

"He arrived just before dawn, in some damned flying sailboat.  Scared
the roof goats half to death, and the militia, too.  Apparently Lady
Jangchup---she's the King's Hand these days---is worried enough about
us changing course to send her chief magician hawking after us under
full sail."

Razi laughed.  "*La*, so is old Barramarrabee dead then? And Roderick
the Rhymer also?"

"*Her* chief magician, not the king's," the captain emphasized.  "He
was very careful to make that distinction.  'Not speaking on behalf of
the Throne and Collar', and so on.  Anyway, he had a few things to say
when I mentioned you were here."

Razi nodded.  "I imagine he would.  We are not friends."

"I gathered that." The captain lifted his cup to his lips.  "But from
what he tells me, you and Lady Kembe are."

Erileine's breath caught.  Lady Kembe was the most powerful magician
in the Karaband---some said in the whole world.  There weren't just
stories about here, there were *legends*.

Razi met the captain's sharp eyes.  "Am I accused of anything?"

"Accused? No.  But when you boarded in Mau Ngapcha, all you told me
was that you wanted to see what was in the Captain's House library.
There was no mention of you being Lady Kembe's fetch."

"I am no one's fetch." Razi didn't raise his voice, but his tone could
have struck sparks off flint.  "I have served her from time to time,
as I would serve anyone else who wanted old books found and read, but
I am not, and never have been, soul-ridden.  If Thomas says otherwise,
I call him a liar."

The silence that followed stretched as tight as Klaues's smile.  The
captain finally broke it with a sigh.  "Fair enough," he grumbled.
"But you could have said."

Razi spread his hands.  "*La*, there is always much that could be
said, and is not.  And much that is said, that---"

The captain waved him into silence. "Don't get philosophical on me.
Mind telling me what it is between you two?"

"He tried to kill my previous apprentice," Razi said calmly.  "It is
not the sort of thing one easily sets aside."

The captain looked at Erileine as if she was something Razi had
brought with him from the market.  "I imagine not."

"Tell him about the picture," Klaues said.

"I'm getting there," the captain said testily.  "Here---what do you
make of this?" He picked a book up off on the table and passed it to
Razi.

The bookster studied the page in front of him for a moment before
tilting it so that Erileine could see a tinted sketch of a small
village in a mountain valley.  "Ruudian," the bookster said after a
moment.  "See the blues? And the way the trees are just sticks on a
green background?" Suddenly he laughed.  "*La,* and of course the
artist has signed it, which helps.  Larren Mehgasdottir...  I don't
know the name, but from the style, I would guess it to be a hundred
years old, perhaps somewhat less."

"Mm hm." The captain sipped his chocolate.  "Notice anything special
about it?"

Razi shook his head.  Erileine started to shake hers as well, then
hesitated.  There was something familiar about the scene...  "It's
just like Gandan Berth!" she blurted.  "The big bowl the mountain sits
in!"

The captain nodded.  "That's what I said.  Thomas said some spell or
other pulled him to it.  If you flip the page over, it's called *The
Mine at Tinhead*."

"Which is where?" the bookster asked, still studying the picture.

"In Praczedt.  Upriver from Anyalcze.  About three weeks away at our
usual speed, as the parrot flies, though at the rate we're going, we
could be there in..."

"Five days," Klaues volunteered.

"Five days.  Don't suppose there's any mention of the place in any of
your books, is there?"

"*La*, they're actually your books," Razi corrected mildly.  "And no,
not that I recall, but we will certainly look."

"Please." The captain set his empty cup on the table.  "But keep it to
yourself until we know whether there's anything to it.  There's enough
rumors and what-not kiting around right now."

"On my blood," Razi said, dipping his head slightly.

"Thank you." The captain glanced at Erileine.

"Mine too," she said hastily.

The captain stood and tugged his jacket straight.  "Well then.  Thank
you for your time."

Setting the book on the table and standing in turn, Razi bowed
slightly.  "Thank *you*.  But may I ask, can you perhaps tell me where
Thomas is to be found? I should pay my respects."

The captain's brow furrowed.  "There'll be no blood shed on my
mountain, is that clear?"

Razi placed his right hand over his eyes.  "May I be struck blind."

"Hmph.  He's probably upstairs with the birds.  Said Lady Jangchup
wanted him to send word as soon as he arrived."

"*La*, then if I may excuse myself? Thank you.  *Sra* Klaues, good
afternoon.  Come, Erileine.  Let us say hello to our young magician."
