Piaerre gasped and clutched at the doorframe. He had thought the last
room was big...

They were standing on a balcony the size of his family's house. The
downward tilt of the floor made Piaerre feel like he was falling into
space. Below them lay a huge stone amphitheatre. Its floor was a maze
of carved stone benches, waist-high walls, free-standing doors, and
heavy sculptures that reminded Piaerre of the pictures children drew
of monsters. Glowing globes of dayglass, the smallest larger than any
piece Piaerre had ever seen, shone here and there in the maze.

And overhead-overhead, the entire roof was opening up like a
flower. Four petals of stone, each a hundred strides from tip to base
and twenty strides thick, were slowly pivoting upward, opening the
amphitheatre to the sky.

"There," Razi said, pointing. A flat-topped pyramid, two stories high,
stood at an angle in the center of the amphitheatre. The Hett had
built a wooden stage around it to give themselves a level floor; their
boots drummed on its planks as they hurried back and forth between the
strange machines assembled on it. They were made of gold and glass, of
granite, of brightly-colored coral and enormous bones, all connected
by gear trains and cables.

As the Avauntois stared in wonder and horror, an eerie blue light rose
from one of the machines like steam from a kettle. A face, ten times
life size and too narrow to be human, suddenly appeared above another,
its mouth open as if to laugh or scream, then vanished. As it did so,
the rumbling suddenly stopped, leaving the four sections of the stone
roof standing upright around them like faceless guardians.

Razi cursed, fast and low. "We must find stairs," he said.

Gaeston caught his sleeve. "It'll be faster to climb. Here." Handing
his spear to Razi, he slipped the coil of rope off his shoulder and
knotted it around the balcony's stone railing.

"Will it take your weight?" Laeuc asked.

Gaeston shrugged. "Only one way to find out, isn't there?" He swung
his leg over the railing.

* * *

A minute later, the five of them stood together on the amphitheatre's
tilted floor. A thousand balconies stared down at them like spectators
at some strange game; ahead and below, the Hett hurried about their
work.

"La, we have company," Razi whispered, pointing. Four soldiers were
marching toward the center stage. Sitting upright on the sedan chair
they carried was a middle-aged man in a plain gray uniform. He swayed
slightly with the chair's motion, but looked neither right nor left.

Gaeston tightened his grip on his spear. "One of their magicians?"

Razi nodded. "Just so. And la, do you see over there? I think they are
the others." Two more sedan chairs stood empty next to the wooden
stage. A uniformed woman with her hair pulled back in a severe white
bun was being helped down from a third. She kept one hand on the
shoulder of the soldier helping her as he led her over to where two
others were standing.

Gaeston made a sound in his throat. "They blind?"

"La, not the soldiers. There are more of them than I had hoped."

"Well, I didn't come all this way just to watch them do whatever the
weeping hells they're going to do!"

"Sh." Razi raised a warning hand. "Blind is not deaf. I only meant, we
cannot simply attack them. They would reap us like wheat."

"So what do you suggest?" Laeuc asked.

Razi pointed at the arched doorway the last sedan chair had come
through. "If their magicians came from Forecastle, then the stone
should come the same route. Perhaps there will be fewer guarding it
than there are here."

"And then?"

Razi shrugged eloquently.

They hurried toward the stage, bent nearly double to hide behind the
stone pews and statues. Thummmmm... Two more machines lit up, one
purple, the other green.

In the center of the stage, Hett soldiers lifted the lid off a
heavy-looking crate. Quickly but carefully, they levered its walls
apart and cleared away matted straw to reveal a statue of a man with
ram's horns curled on the sides of his head.

"Saints and their mercies," Razi whispered. "Oh, la, saints, if you
have ever guided us, guide us now."

"What is it?" Laeuc asked, but the bookster was already two strides
away, as light and as deadly as a tiger on the hunt.

Around a wall, through a door, past a statue of a bear with bat wings
and a snake for a tail, up two stairs and down two more... With every
step, Piaerre was afraid one of the Hett would look their way, but
none did.

A fourth machine came to life, adding orange to the swirling
light. They were a hundred strides from the entrance the Hett wizard
had come through. Eighty, fifty, twenty...

Razi pulled up short as a squad of soldiers marched into the room,
followed by a second and a third. A gray-haired man, his face
half-drowned by a heavy beard, followed them, and was in turn followed
by three more squads.

In his hands, the man held a polished marble casket. Piaerre's heart
sank. It had to be the Pilot Stone, but there were almost fifty
soldiers around it. There was no way they could-

Razi stood and pitched three dark blue vials at the soldiers. Even
before they hit the floor he was running, his quicksilver sword in his
hand.

Crack! Crack! Crack! Darkness billowed up from the shattered vials. As
it engulfed the bookster, Laeuc sent an arrow whistling through the
air at the nearest soldier. "Could have weeping told us!" Gaeston
bellowed, stepping into guard position as Laeuc drew another arrow
from the quiver on his hip.

"Piaerre!" Laeuc shouted. "Get behind us!" But his son was already
running toward the inky cloud that had swallowed the bookster.

He held his breath, expecting smoke, but the darkness had no more
taste or smell than a shadow. Ahead of him, metal clanged on metal. A
cry for aid was suddenly cut off.

He banged his shin hard against something as his father shouted his
name again. What had he been thinking? He couldn't help Razi-he didn't
even know where he was.

Suddenly he slipped on something wet. "Oof!" He fell clumsily to the
floor.

"Ashenope! Ashenope arra te paurenatepe ejo!" Someone grabbed his
hand, holding tight when he tried to pull away, and pushed something
heavy into his arms.

Smooth, heavy, and cool to the touch... He ran his hands over it,
already knowing what they would tell him. Angled sides, rounded
corners, a flat top: it was the casket the Hett had been carrying. It
was the Pilot Stone.

The darkness cleared a moment later to reveal a scene of
confusion. Razi was on his knees, his hands behind his head, one
crossbow against his back, another pointed at his chest. The hilt of
his sword lay just out of reach in a pool of mercury. Three men lay in
pools of their own blood beside him. One of them was the man who had
been carrying the casket.

Ten strides away, Gaeston and Laeuc looked at the circle of Hett
soldiers around them and lowered their weapons. "But I'm damned if
I'll kneel," Gaeston spat.

A bald Hett with four ribbons tied around his sleeve led one of the
iron-eyed magicians down from the stage and over to Razi. "Auedje ne
atarappa paurenatepe ke fe iuadje te?" she demanded coldly.

Razi smiled politely as blood started to run down his chin. "La, my
apologies, but I don't speak-"

"Oh yes you do," the Hett magician said in Avauntois. "Now, where is
it?"

Razi shrugged without taking his hands from his head. "I swear, I do
not know."

"All right." She pointed at the two Avauntois. "Pick one."

"La, you can murder those men if you want," Razi said, "I still
won't-"

"Murder?" The Hett laughed angrily. "You talk to me of murder? How
many men have you killed tonight? Eight? Ten?"

"I regret that," the bookster replied calmly. "Truly, I do."

"Tell it to their families," the Hett snarled. She stabbed an angry
finger at Razi. "I am tired of my people dying, do you understand
that? I am tired of people who have done no harm in this world being
beaten by drunks, or driven from their homes by mobs, or robbed blind
by petty lordlings who know that no one will defend them. Your
mistress has done nothing to help us-nothing!-and neither has anyone
else, so now we are going to help ourselves."

"I grieve for your wounds," Razi said. "But what was done to you does
not make right what you would do here."

"No, it doesn't," she agreed coldly. "But it will stop it from ever
happening again. Now, where is the stone?"

Razi said nothing. The woman's jaw tightened. "Very well. Colonel!
That one." She pointed at Laeuc.

The soldier who had led her over to Razi snapped a salute. Drawing his
sword, he walked ten paces across the tilted stone floor to stand
beside the Avauntois.

"I will ask you once more," she said softly. "Or twice, if need
be. And then it will be your turn."

Razi looked up at her steadily. "As you will."

She turned and raised her arm. The Hett soldier brought his sword up.

"No!" Piaerre shouted. The magician whirled around. Twenty strides
away, Piaerre stood with the casket above his head. Its contents, a
rough stone that gleamed like iron, lay on the pedestal of the statue
beside him. "Let him go, or I'll smash it!"

The soldier glanced at the magician. She shook her head. "Neh."

"I'll do it!" Piaerre shouted. "I swear on my blood, I will!"

The magician laughed. "Go ahead." Behind her, Laeuc made a small sound
as the Hett added a hair's weight to the pressure on his sword. "But I
swear on my blood, if you do, there will be nothing left of Starboard
Town but ashes when the sun comes up."

The moment stretched and stretched. Laeuc gurgled as the soldier
pressed his sword a hair's weight harder against his throat. "Don't
you weeping dare," Gaeston growled.

Piaerre looked at Razi. The bookster's calm, clear eyes held his. He
didn't nod, or shake his head-he just waited.

Piaerre sagged. "Here," he said, setting the casket on the pedestal
beside the Pilot Stone. "Take it."

As the soldiers stepped forward, Razi lashed out with his foot. The
blow caught the magician just below the ribs. As she crumpled
backward, Razi snatched up the hilt of his sword and slashed at the
nearest soldier.

Who flinched, and then laughed. "Teppate me peua netahante adj auje,"
he said, pointing at the pool of quicksilver that still lay on the
floor.

"La, I suppose not," Razi said. He threw the sword hilt at the
soldier-

-and collapsed like a puppet whose strings had been cut. Behind him,
the magician he'd kicked lowered her arm. "This grows tiresome," she
gasped.

The soldier beside her helped her to her feet. "Ede ebpeten," she
said. "Get him up. And bring them here-all of them."

Rough hands dragged Piaerre to the stage and pushed him to his knees
beside his father and Gaeston. A wobbly Razi hit the planks with a
thud a moment later.

"Now watch," the magician said. "Watch, so that your mistress will
know not to meddle here again." She took the casket from the soldier
holding it and walked up to the stage.

The lights above the strange machines on the stage throbbed the colors
of the week, purple and blue, green and yellow, orange, and deep,
blood red. The magician with the casket took her place in the circle
around the ram-horned statue.

Piaerre could hear the machines now. They were singing to each other,
great long notes that ran from bone-tingling bass to fluting whistles
that made his ears ring. The air tingled as the light folded around
itself and became a shining emptiness too bright to look at. The
magicians were chanting in time with the machines' rhythmic pulse. The
light grew brighter, dazzling Piaerre even through his eyelids.

And then the magician opened the lid of the casket. The light that
shone from inside it was unbearable. It wasn't too hot, or too bright:
it was too real. Piaerre threw up his arm to cover his face, but the
light was still too much. It was shining right through him-right
through the whole world.

As one, the magicians on the stage cried out. Piaerre lowered his arm
just in time to see the light sucked into the top of the statue's
head, like smoke being inhaled.

The whole world held its breath for a moment, and then the statue
opened its eyes and tilted its head to one side. "Finally." The word
appeared inside Piaerre's head, like a sliver of ice dropped into a
pool of water.

As one, the Hett raised their arms. "Aya! Aya! Aya!" they shouted. "It
is done! It is done! It is done!"

"My lord." Tears ran down the Hett magician's face, but her voice was
strong. "My lord, welcome. Welcome back."

"Who are these?" The statue's thought took in Razi and the Avauntois.

"Unhearing ones, my lord. They tried to prevent your return."

"They failed."

"Yes, my lord. Do you wish them returned to the earth?"

"No." The statue slowly swept its gaze around the chamber, taking in
the now-silent machines, the awestruck Hett, and the silent, watchful
balconies. "This place is a mess."

"Yes, my lord."

"It needs mending."

"Yes, my lord." The magician's voice was exultant.

The statue opened its eyes. They were steel marbles, Piaerre
noticed. Even without that, and the horns coiled on either side of its
head where its ears should have been, and its hairlessness, and the
complete lack of anything male or female between its legs, it still
wouldn't have passed for human. It was too perfect.

"This world is damaged." Each word came perfectly formed into
Piaerre's mind. "As is this ship. All needs mending. There are deserts
where there should be gardens. The moon strays from its course."

"Slow poisons rot the heart of the world." The Hett magician spoke the
words aloud in time with the statue. Others joined in, some weeping
with joy. "Rivers run outside their courses, and monsters roam
free. We must mend what is broken."

"We must mend what is broken." the statue agreed. Its steel gaze fell
on the Avauntois. "Go and tell the world. The Great Work begins."

One moment they were standing in the heart of the mountain. The next,
they were on Slip Street, just outside the gate of the Captain's
House. "Hoy!" Gaeston grabbed the gate to steady himself.

"Was that... Was that an Angel?" Piaerre said. Razi nodded.

"But they're dead!"

Razi shrugged. "Not any more."

Anything else he might have said was cut off as the ground lurched,
throwing them to the ground. Slowly but inexorably, the mountain began
to turn over.
