Queçenne burst into tears when her mother told her what had happened
to Fraederiq.  "You'd best go up to your lessons," Laeuc told his
younger daughter, watching helplessly as his wife gathered their
oldest child into her arms and made soothing noises.

"I suppose," Erileine said. It didn't seem right, practicing verbs
when someone she had known all her life had just died, but what else
could she do?

She trudged up Slip Street to the Captain's House, watching sidelong
to see if anyone's face changed when they caught sight of her. "It
wasn't my fault," she wanted to say, but there was no one to say it
to.

The purple lumens in the Captain's House garden filled the air with a
wet peppery smell. *I should trim them back,* she thought for the
third time in as many days.  She took a brick of dayglass from the
tray in the garden where she had left it the night before to soak up
the morning light and went inside. Unlacing her boots, she slipped her
feet into the fleece slippers that waited beside the door and went
into the library.

Razi was sitting in his usual place at the narrow table that stretched
nearly the length of room. The lantern by his elbow shone dull orange,
its stored daylight exhausted. "Good afternoon, bookster," Erileine
said, replacing the spent piece of dayglass in the lantern with the
freshly-charged one.

Razi looked up from the origami book that lay unfolded on the table in
front of him. "Clear day. How are you?"

Erileine shrugged, not knowing how to answer the question. "Is that
Bantangui?" she asked.

"*La*, yes, a poem." Razi pushed it across to his apprentice.  Golden
curlicues and ruby zigzags danced around the elegant calligraphy on
the delicate mulberry-paper page. "The shapes and colors tell you what
you should feel as you read it. The green means sadness, and these
sapphire dots? They are for irony.  Whatever the poem says, *la*, you
are supposed to feel its opposite."

Erileine gazed hungrily at the page, her remorse momentarily
forgotten. Every day, it seemed, the bookster casually pulled a
miracle off the shelf.

She realized suddenly that Razi was still waiting. "What does it say?"

Razi grinned. "That the writer feels woe, such woe as no one has ever
felt before, at their lover's departure. But *la*, the more woe they
feel, the more sapphire they use." He folded the book and dropped it
into the crate he referred to as the compost heap. If it had been
interesting, he would have had Erileine catalog it and put it back on
the shelves that lined the library's walls. If it had been *really*
interesting, he would have spent an hour going through it, talking
aloud while Erileine made notes and asked questions.

The captains of Avaunt had been retiring to Starboard Town for two
hundred years. In four months, Razi and Erileine had sorted one wall
of their collected books and one shelf of a second.  Four more shelves
and two more walls, and what Razi called "the easy part" would be
done. Then they would start the research he had come to do in the
first place. Where had each book come from? Who had drawn each map,
signed each contract, scribbled notes in the margins of each yellowed
tax receipt? And what light could they cast on the centuries
immediately following the fall of the Pilots? "Everything that has
happened since has been footnotes to that time," Razi had explained
the first day Erileine started work for him. "If we would truly
understand who we are, *la*, we must first understand those years."

He reached for a small volume bound in faded red leather and set it in
front of Erileine. "*Unprofitable Speculations*," she haltingly read
aloud. "By His Balance, Eimin di Cuayaçedil."

"It is better pronounced '*Quay*-ya-se-*deel*'," the bookster
corrected.  He opened the book to a spot marked by a colored thread.
"Here. The original text is on the left, in Arañese. The translation
is on the right. It is perhaps a little loftier than you are used to,
but *la*, see what you can make of it."

Erileine scanned the first few lines. "And among the---Bantangui?" Razi
nodded. "Among the Bantangui, they believe that when people die, they
are reborn as themselves..." Her voice trailed off.

"Go on," her teacher said mildly.

Erileine blinked. She was *not* going to start crying. "When people
die, they are reborn as themselves, to live their lives over once
again. This they must do, time without number, until they have lived
it---I'm sorry, I don't know that word."

"*Ipfa'ana," Razi said. "Or *ipfakhana*, in the southern form. It
means properly."

Erileine nodded. "Until they have lived it properly." Erileine looked
up at her teacher. "Is this because of Fraederiq?"

Razi turned his hands palm up, then palm down, in a Karabandi shrug.
"There is more later, in the same vein. Eimin had reason to ask these
questions once. I thought perhaps you would find some use in his
thoughts."

Erileine closed the book carefully. "Thank you."

The bookster nodded. "So," he said, his voice suddenly brisk, "Today
you will finish with those deeds, yes? So that tomorrow we may move on
to things more interesting?"

"Yes, bookster." Erileine opened the ledger she had been indexing for
the past week, drew a lamp closer, and set to work.

The room was silent for the next three hours except for the scratching
of Erileine's pen, the leaf-fall whisper of pages being turned, and
the occasional rumble from Erileine's stomach.  When these grew
continuous, the bookster said, "*La,* enough, go and eat. I will greet
you tomorrow."

*"Shalma'a,*" Erileine replied , somewhat self-consciously, raising his
palms to his teacher in the Karabandi style.

"*Shalma'a,*" the bookster replied before bending his head over the
old diary he had spent the greater part of the afternoon deciphering.

Erileine traded her slippers for her boots and let herself out
quietly.  The horizon had already eaten half the sun; the fat orange
blob that remained looked like a ball of yarn someone had sat on. A
herd of clouds was passing in the distance, their bellies purple-gray
with unshed rain.  If she had been at her grandfather's, Erileine
would have looked for their shadows on the ground below.

The air smelled of pine logs burning in kitchen stoves, and of squash
and beans.  All of a sudden she remembered playing tag in the trees
when she was little: herself, Queçenne, Niquolas and his slow-wittd
brother Matthieu, Fraederiq, Uego who had moved to Portside when his
mother remarried... She couldn't have been more than seven or eight.
The mountain must have been near the equator, because darkness had
fallen as suddenly as a lid being put on a pot. They had talked a
little too loudly in the dark on their way back to town until
Fraederiq said, "I can smell dinner." Laughing, they had raced the
rest of the way.

She wiped her eyes on her sleeve and set off for home.

* * *

Three generations sat at the varnished pine table that Laeuc had made
his wife as a wedding present eighteen years before. Steam rose lazily
from the scrambled eggs, onions, and tiny cubes of squash in the heavy
clay pot in the middle of the table. It was Queçenne and Erileine's
favorite meal, but both of them picked at it as if it were
cauliflower.  Queçenne's eyes were still red.  When Erileine
whispered, "I'm sorry," she nodded without looking up.

The adults were as quiet as the children as they mopped up eggs with
hunks of crumbly potato bread.  There had been no word from the
captain.  In its absence, speculation had swirled about all afternoon,
leaving the whole town exhausted in its wake.

Laeuc was doubly tired after sitting with Gaeston for an hour.
Fraederiq's father hadn't said much besides, "Thanks," when Laeuc
poured him his first glass of Bantangui rum, and, "Leave the bottle,
will you?" when Laeuc rose to go.

"Well," FIXME finally said, pushing her plate away. "So what does
*sra* bookster think of all this?"

Erileine shrugged. "He doesn't know. He said if anything like this had
ever happened before, everybody would probably already know about it."

"He's probably right," she said briskly. She pushed the stew crock
toward Erileine. "Take that up for the bookster.  Queçenne, why don't
you tidy up?"

Having to scrape egg off her mother's precious cast-iron pan would
normally have sent Queçenne into a blue sulk. That evening, she just
nodded and took it out the kitchen door. A moment later, the foursome
inside the house heard it clang against the water cistern.  A moment
later, they heard Queçenne's quiet sobs.

"I'll see to her," FIXME said, rising. "Erileine, make sure you wear
your coat."

"I'm only going up the street," she protested.

"Do as your maere says," Laeuc sighed. Vurt grunted, his elbow on the
table and his chin on his fist.

Warm yellow light was still dribbling out between the slats of the
shutters on the library window when she reached the Captain's House.
She paused. Had she heard a voice? Curious, she stepped closer to the
window.

The shutters were slightly ajar. Through them, she heard Razi speaking
in Karabandi, all esses and vees and doubled vowels. He paused, then
spoke again.

Erileine frowned. Who was he talking to?  She stood on tiptoes, but
the shutters' slats were angled upward too sharply for him to see
through. Razi spoke again. "*Iye*," he said, "No."

Frustrated, she went around the corner and untied the leather cord
that held the door closed. She pushed it open gently. "Hello?" she
said uncertainly. "Bookster? I've brought you some dinner."

No one answered. Erileine rapped her knuckles against the door
frame. "Hello?"

"*Ayah*." A chair scraped back. Razi's sandals slapped on the
pine-planked floor. A moment later, the bookster opened it and blinked
at her.

"*La*, Erileine... Come in, come in." He turned and walked unsteadily
back to the table in the center of the room. An earthy smell like
incense hung in the air. Erileine was shocked to see drops of sweat on
the bookster's shaven head. Everything she had ever read about strange
southern vices came rushing back to him.

"Um, my maere thought you might want some dinner."

Razi nodded jerkily. "So kind... I was just meditating.  Thinking,
*la*, so much to think about today."  A thick candle stood on a square
brass plate in the middle of the table.  Razi licked his thumb and
finger and pinched the faint wisp of smoke coiling up from its wick.
"*La*, that *does* smell good. Please, to sit, to sit. We'll talk
while I eat."

He attacked the tepid stew as if he hadn't eaten in a week.  "Here,"
he said through a mouthful of food, pulling an old book with a faded
blue leather cover off the top of the pile on the table. "I found this
in the back. Have you seen it?"

Erileine shook his head. "What is it?"

Razi opened it and pushed it to her. "*La*, you tell me."

Erileine studied it. The pages were printed rather than hand-lettered,
so the book was less than a hundred and fifty years old. The language
was Gandan-o, but there was no royal stamp on the title page, so it
had escaped the censor's inspection.

She sounded the words out carefully.  "The tunnels beneath Gandan
and Trunggar are so---I don't know that word."

"Similar. Go on."

"Similar as to---I'm sorry, bookster, I don't know the next word
either."

Razi wiped the last of the stew from the pot with his finger, licked
it off, and dried his hand briskly on his sleeve. "*La*, no matter,
you did well." He tapped the page. "The author measured the tunnels
below Gandan Berth and those underneath the royal palace in Trunggar.
They have the same height and width, the same distance between
turnings. From this, she argues the latter were also made as a berth
for the mountain."

Erileine frowned. "So you think we're headed to Trunggar?"

Razi shook his head. "That is not the direction in which the mountain
moves.  But *la*, perhaps tomorrow we can search for other
descriptions of tunnels to see where else we might be going."

He stretched and yawned.  "Enough of books. Would you choose to walk
down to my lodgings with me so that I do not lose myself?"

Erileine thought that Razi was about as likely to get lost as he was
to grow wings and fly, but she was happy to have company. As they
walked down Slip Street, the bookster had her say words aloud in
Gandan-o, reminding him every dozen steps to roll her r's and soften
her n's.

They stopped when they reached Mamaere Mayeule's. "Please thank your
parents for dinner," Razi said. "I shall see you tomorrow?"

"Yes, bookster. Good night."

"Good night." Light and noise spilled out onto the street as he opened
the door, along with a few respectful greetings. The room inside was
packed as tightly as a shearing pen in spring. Voices swirled around,
each interrupting the one before, and were muffled again as the sturdy
door closed. Erileine looked up. Diwei, the Western Star, should have
been almost directly above the chimney of the Captain's House.
Instead, it glittered a double handspan to the left. Wishing there was
still stew in the pot she was carrying to keep her hands warm, she
hurried toward home.
