By the time they reached Mamaere Mayeule's, half of Starboard Town was
standing in the street, anxiously asking the other half why the
mountain had changed course and what it meant. "I don't know!" Bosun
Uyves repeated loudly. His voice was as big as his shoulders were
broad, but even he could barely make himself heard above the
hubbub. "I don't know anything more than you do. No, the captain
didn't tell me this was going to--- Yes, I'm sure he knows. No, I
mean, I'm sure he knows it's happened, not I'm sure he knew it was
going to--- Salt and scissors, Vurt, what in Luck's name is all that
for?"

The townspeople turned to gape at the old man.  "What, this?" Vurt
said, glancing down at his crossbow. "I just thought--- You know,
better safe than sorry."

"Safe from what?" someone asked.

Vurt scowled. "If I knew, I wouldn't be standing here, would I?"

"Let's just keep our ideas to ourselves," the bosun said loudly,
glaring at the crowd. "And thank your favorite saints that we got off
with nothing worse than sprained ankles and broken crockery."

Erileine felt as though she was going to throw up again. Before she
could speak, someone spun her around and pulled her into a hug.
"Eri! Are you all right?"

She disentangled herself. "I'm fine, maere," she said, embarrassed.
"I'm fine. Where's Que√ßenne?"

"Helping with Matthieu," Laeuc said from beside his wife.  "They were
hoeing beans when it happened. Matthieu's still frightened, so they're
trying to calm him down. Like the bosun said, it's lucky no one was
really hurt."

"I wish that was true," Vurt said. He caught the bosun's eye.

The scowl fell from Uyves' face as Vurt's words sunk in.  "Quiet!" he
bellowed. "Quiet, dammit!"

His tone accomplished what volume alone could not. As the crowd fell
silent, Vurt stepped forward to put his hand on Gaeston's arm.  "I'm
sorry.  Saints and all their stories, man, I'm sorry. Fraederiq and
Erileine were down by my place when it happened. Fraederiq went over
the side."

"Oh, no," someone whispered. Someone else started to cry. The shock on
the bosun's face mirrored that on Gaeston's.

"What?" Gaeston said helplessly.

Vurt squeezed his arm, never taking his eyes away from Gaeston's. "I'm
sorry," he repeated.

Without warning, Gaeston knocked Vurt's arm away.  "Hold on, there,"
the bosun said sternly, grabbing Gaeston's sleeve.  "Just hold on. It
isn't *his* fault."

"What the hells was my boy doing down by *your* place?" Gaeston
demanded.

"Never mind that," the bosun ordered. "Get your climbing gear.  Laeuc,
Donaien---everyone, get rigged and get moving." With a speed born of
many late-night searches for missing goats, the bosun quickly
organized a search party.

Erileine stood silently beside her mother, forgotten in the rush. She
still felt sick. Why hadn't she grabbed Fraederiq's hand? And what was
going to happen to her when the bosun had a moment to stop and think?
Half the town must have seen Fraederiq and Erileine running down Slip
Street. Would they think she had pushed him?

Wait. "Where's Razi?" she asked. "Where's the bookster?" How could she
have forgotten her teacher? The shelves in the Captain's House were
mahogany, as tough and as heavy as iron. If one of them had fallen on
his head...

"*La*, Razi is fine." The lilting voice behind Erileine made her jump.
She spun around and gasped with relief.

The bookster was as tall as the bosun, but as narrow as the bosun was
wide.  His skin was desert-black instead of mountain-brown, all except
his palms, which were a startling pink.  In place of the Avauntois'
boots, trousers, shirts, and colorfully-embroidered vests, he wore a
tan ankle-length robe that he called a *deel*, a wide woven leather
belt, and thick-soled sandals.  He had arrived in Starboard Town just
after it left Mau Ngapcha four months ago with a note from the captain
saying that he was to inspect and catalog the house's library.
Erileine had become his apprentice three days later.

As always, the expression on Razi's face was somehow cheerful and
melancholy at the same time. He dipped his head toward the bosun. "I am
sorry to hear of the young man's passing. I regret I did not know him
well."

"Don't go building his pyre just yet," Uyves said sharply. "He could
have got lucky." Razi dipped his head again but did not reply.

The search lasted an hour. It would have been half that, but no one
wanted to be the first to give up. There was nowhere for Fraederiq to
be---no lonely trees, no outcroppings, nothing. "I'm sorry," the bosun
said quietly to Gaeston, squeezing his shoulder as Vurt had done.
Dry-eyed, Fraederiq's father slung his ropes over his shoulder and
walked slowly up Slip Street to his empty home. He didn't look at
Erileine as he passed.

As the searchers returned to town they gathered in Mamaere Mayeule's,
which served by turns as Starboard Town's inn, its general store when
the weather was too bad for tinkers and pack-traders to set up their
stalls on Slip Street, and its meeting hall.  Built for weddings and
birthdays, its main room couldn't hold half of the two hundred or more
people trying to crowd into it to look at the map Razi had brought
down from the Captain's House.

"Stop shoving!" the bosun thundered. "Mayeule, open the shutters so
people can hear. Kings and their collars, I said *stop shoving!*"

Miraculously, people did. Erileine found herself pinned against the
edge of a table with half a dozen people peering over her shoulders
and half a dozen more peering over theirs.

Beside him, Razi seemed oblivious to the press. He unfolded a stiff
sheet of parchment to make a square an arm's length across. The map's
colors had faded with age, and the gall ink used for the lettering had
gone brown, but the straight blue line that showed the mountain's path
across the face of Cherne was as clear as the day it was drawn.

The bosun put a salt shaker on the blue line. "So, let's say we're
here. From what I can tell, we're heading north of northeast instead
of pure north. If we stay on this course---"

"What if we turn again?" someone called out.

"I said if, didn't I?" Uyves growled. He tapped the inverted triangles
marking the mountains that defined the border between the great plains
of Darp and the patchwork quilt of princedoms, dukedoms, and
my-back-yarddoms that was Praczedt. "*If* we stay on the course, we'll
hit the Brumosos in a couple of weeks at most."

"Did he say we were going to hit the mountains?" "Saints, we're going to
crash into a mountain!" "We'll be crushed like bugs!"

"We are *not* going to *hit* anything!" the bosun bellowed. "And the
next person who says we are will spend the rest of this trip pulling
weeds!"

In the hush that followed, Erileine said, "Do you think---" She
stopped himself.

The bosun raised his eyebrows warningly. "Do I think what?"

"Nothing, *sra*."

"Come on, lass, spit it out."

Erileine swallowed. "Do you think something might have happened to
Gandan?  I mean, maybe the mountain's turning around because there's
nowhere for it to berth any more."

"Saints and their songs," someone gasped. "My Chaentelle is 'prenticing
there."

Erileine winced under the bosun's glare. "Or maybe---"

Razi elbowed her ribs. "*La*, or perhaps the mountain is thirsty," he
said loudly. "Like a camel.  Once they decide they want a drink,
straight away they go to the nearest water. There is no arguing with
them, I assure you, none."

The bosun grunted. "Not likely. We filled the cisterns at Mau Ngapcha,
same as we always do. Never heard of the mountain getting thirsty
before."

Razi shrugged. "Everything has its first time." He reached for the
map, but the bosun stopped him.

"Leave it here," Uyves said. "Anything else *does* happen, we'll want
to have another look."

He raised his voice so that it would carry to the crowd outside.
"Captain's probably already figured out what's going on. My bet is,
Jack or one of the condors is already halfway here to tell us what's
what.  'Til we know, there's nothing we can do, so I want you all to
just go about your business. Clean up what you can, fix anything
that's broke..."  He paused a moment. "I'll say the *tehanu* for
Fraederiq tomorrow morning. Anyone wants to add anything to the pyre,
talk to Gaeston before then."

At that, the crowd began to break up. Piaerre stared at the map. The
Brumosos curved across northern Cherne, then strode boldly down its
east coast, past Praczedt and Thind to the long peninsula of Barra
Bantang. The blue line showing the mountain's usual course ran from
Mau Ngapcha in the southeast to Gandan Berth in the northwest. If
Avaunt kept going northeast instead, through the Brumosos, they'd
could reach the sea in a month.

But what if it turned again? It could take them...anywhere. The
enormity of the thought dizzied her. The Staircase Kingdom at the East
Pole, or Garheim in the north, or even further, to Anuvatik---they
could just keep flying forever.

The thought made her mouth go dry. Condors and griffins, cloudherds
and the occasional wild-eyed balloonist---they could carry news and a
few light luxuries up to the mountain, but not water. Once the great
cisterns that lay inside the mountain ran dry, they would be at the
mercy of the rain and snow.

She traced a line across the map with his finger east, past Sullair
and over the ocean. What if Avaunt went all the way to the Worldrim
and just kept going, past where the last stream fell forever into
nothing, past the last rogue cloud blown far from its herd, and out
into the void that separated Cherne from the stars? She shivered. The
world suddenly seemed very small.
