<!-- start: 2017-10-21 -->
<!-- target: 80000 -->
<!-- deadline: 2017-12-20 -->
# The Bookster's Apprentice<br>Greg Wilson

*Take a squat pyramid of rock, four gallops square and two gallops
tall. Lift it into the air, then tilt it back like an old man looking
up at a rooftop, so that its leading edge rises gently to the central
peak, while its stern drops so steeply that only goats, birds, and a
small village called Aft Landing can find a foothold. Put a town of
some ten thousand souls on its bow, and smaller towns (not
villages---their inhabitants are quite definite about that) on its
port and starboard flanks. Bash its underside against stationary
mountains until it's ragged, and let rain, snow, and windblown sand
weather it for a few thousand years. That is Avaunt.*

*Now put it in motion. Eight months north from Mau Ngapcha to Normous
Berth, with half the world's chocolate in its warehouses, along with
cinnamon, cloves, silk, and cured bamboo as tough as stone. Two weeks
on the ground, while merchants from all over northern Cherne elbow
past each other to make bargains, and then another eight months in the
air with grain, cider, wool, and steel for the south.*

*When the Pilots ruled the world, Avaunt roamed across the world.
After they destroyed themselves, it was taken over by wild-eyed
tinkers with a fascination for the Pilots' strange machines. They
called themselves the Hett, and as the years passed, the people who
lived below them regarded them with growing suspicion. Stories spread
of the Hett's hoarded wealth, and of the plots they must be hatching
to one day rule the world as the Pilots had.*

*Eventually, an ambitious young prince with few prospects at home
decided to do more than mutter. The next time Avaunt landed at Normous
Berth, the rag-tag army he had recruited attacked. Most of the Hett
were slain outright.  The rest were driven off the mountain with
nothing but the clothes on their backs. It was barely spring, and
bitterly cold, and few survived.*

*The Hett's storied wealth turned out to consist of scrap metal and
books no one knew how to read. Undeterred, the prince retitled himself
the Captain of Avaunt, made his lieutenants bosuns, and gave the
Hett's houses and farms to his followers. Most of them smoked, drank,
or gambled away their gifts, but the rest settled down to trade, raise
families, and watch the world slip past beneath them.*

*Now, look closer. There, in Starboard Town. Five hundred years have
passed; it is Redsday, the 11th of Peridot, 1261. A girl is running
for her life. She just felt the mountain shake for the first time in
centuries, but that's not what she's afraid of. She's afraid of what
the boy chasing her will do to her if he gets his hands on her.*
