Once upon a time, a captain of Avaunt fell in love with a young man
from Aft Landing.  She was twenty years his senior, but when they
spoke, she felt like a girl again.  But one day, as the mountain lay
berthed at Mau Ngapcha, he disappeared.  Some people say he went
looking for glass flowers to give her as a sign of his love.  Others
say he wanted to see more of the world than what passed below Avaunt,
or lacked the courage to tell the captain that he had tired of her.
Whether he was swallowed whole by a python, drained dry by
parasquitoes, or simply shaved off his mustache and changed his name,
he disappeared

In her grief, the captain locked herself away in the Hardeck's highest
room.  Day after lonely day she sat there, neither eating nor
sleeping, until that part of her that could leave this world did.

The room stood empty after that---her nephew, who became captain in
her wake, feared that she might return as a ghost.  Besides, his leg
hurt from a long-ago fall, and there were many stairs between the
Grand Hall and that room.

Some years later, a family of Gifted condors came to the mountain in
search of a new home.  They were northerners, with gray feathers and
sharp eyes, who had nested peacefully in the Brumoso Mountains their
whole lives.  (Peacefully, but not happily---condors are not naturally
cheerful creatures.) When the people of Ruuda overthrew their undead
masters, a wave of anti-Gifted sentiment swept the country.  Raccoons
argued that the anger would die down, and bears matter-of-factly said
that they would eat anyone who tried to harm them, but the condors
just spread their blunt wings and left their troubles behind.

The captain was happy to give them space: they could carry messages to
and from the surface, and even their ungifted progeny would help keep
the mountain's rabbits in check.  He had the room's window widened and
a screen put in to shelter the birds from the wind and rain.  Twice a
week, on Redsday and Greensday, one of the Hardeck's unluckier clerks
swept the rabbit bones on the floor into a sack for burning, refilled
the birds' water jug, and scraped their droppings off their roosting
posts with an old wooden spatula and a wrinkled nose.  New clerks
sometimes tried to chat with the room's residents, but Gifted condors
are hardly more talkative than their ungifted kin.  No one ever asked
the birds whether the captain's ghost haunted the room, and for their
part, they never saw any reason to say.

"By my eyes, a dozen rabbits, hung 'til they're as ripe as cheese! Two
dozen! Just go!"

"Nawp." The first voice was human, heavily accented, and exasperated.
The second was an indifferent rasp.  Razi smiled humorlessly and
thumped the door's drum.

"Yep?" the second voice squawked.

Razi pulled the door open and stepped into the room.  Erileine
followed, her mind still whirling.  Razi worked for Lady Kembe?  For
*Lady Kembe*?

"Ah, Razi! Hello, hello.  So very to see you again.  I've missed the
sound of your sandals behind me---they *are* the same ones, are they
not? Well made, I must say, to have lasted so long." The magician
appeared to be in his early twenties, with red-gold hair, blue eyes,
freckles, and the whitest teeth Erileine had ever seen.  He wore a
long black skirt and a rich brocade jacket, black and dark green with
red and gold thread twisting through it.  The pattern shifted slightly
each time Erileine blinked.

Razi bowed deeply, fluttering his hands through an elaborate desert
greeting.  "Thomas.  Welcome to Avaunt."

"Thank you, thank you.  You look well."

"As do you.  This is my apprentice, Erileine."

Thomas beamed, as if he had been waiting eagerly to meet some famous
wonder-worker.  "The pleasure, truly, the pleasure."  He folded his
hands in front of his chest.

"Hello," Erileine said awkwardly.

Thomas waited.  When she said nothing more, his smile broadened.  "A
woman of few words, eh? Like...  Like...  What was his name? The boy
from Medef? Eyeun?"

"Eimin," Razi corrected calmly.

"Of course, of course, Eimin.  Splendid fellow, very resourceful.  How
is he these days, do you know?"

"Studious.  Happy.  Alive.  And yourself?"

"Oh, alive as well, very much, and busy, busy, busy.  Lady Jangchup is
wonderful, really.  I am learning *so* much from her, and of course
one is grateful for a chance to serve one's fellows however one can."

"I'm sure one is," Razi repeated dryly.

Thomas raised a finger.  "Now, now, that's two unpleasantries in a
row---let's not have a third, shall we? There are serious matters
afoot here.  We can't afford to waste time bickering.  Speaking of
which..." He turned back to the condor, who had neither blinked nor
moved while the humans spoke.  "I believe we were discussing rabbits,
were we not?"

"Nawp," the condor squawked.

"Tsk tsk," Thomas clucked.  "I'm *sure* the captain would want my
letter to reach Lady Jangchup without delay.  I implore you---"

"Nawp." The condor shook her head.  She wasn't as ugly up close as
Erileine had expected.  Her beak was cruelly curved, and bald red skin
on her neck hung in loose wrinkles, but her eyes glittered like
mid-winter icicles, and the ruff of white feathers on her chest looked
as warm as a favorite sweater.  "Might not get back.  Might not know
where back was."

Thomas crossed his arms.  "By my eyes, they're as bad as the waiters
in Anyalcze," he said to Razi.  "Do you have any suggestions?  Wait!"
He snapped his fingers.  "Perhaps you could ask Lady Kembe to pass on
a message on my behalf? She *is* so much better at this kind of thing
than I am."

Razi raised his palms in apology.  "Perhaps the best thing would be if
you carried your message back to Gandan yourself."

Thomas's smile hardened.  Whatever riposte he would have made was
forestalled by wings rustling outside the window.  A moment later, a
second condor sidled into the room.  "Ehp," he squawked.

"Ehp," the first one replied.

"What do they want?" the newcomer asked.

"Message downbelow."

The second condor rustled his feathers.  "Nawp."

"Nawp," the first agreed.  They swiveled their heads in unison to fix
a double stare on Thomas.

"Well, then," the magician said in mock-exasperation that wasn't
really mock at all, "I suppose I'll just have to find some other way.
Thank you for your time." He turned back to Razi, still smiling.
"Razi---as always."

"And you." Razi raised his palms again.

"And good luck with your apprentice.  I hope her education is easier
than her predecessor's was." Thomas caught himself.  "Oh, but I forgot
to ask.  Exactly which of your many trades is this one studying?"

Razi raised his eyebrows at Erileine.  "I'm learning languages,"
Erileine said, feeling foolish.  "I want to be a bookster some day."

"Ah, how worthy.  I'm sure Lady Kembe will find that valuable."

"I'm not learning it for her." Even in his own ears, Erileine sounded
defensive.

"Of course not," Thomas agreed warmly.  "Well, clear day and *mingala
ba* to you both."

"Nasty," the second condor squawked after the door closed behind the
magician.

Razi laughed.  "*La*, yes, like ground glass in rice pudding." His
expression grew serious.  "But truly, are you not flying any messages
today? Or was that just for his benefit?"

"Nawp." The female condor's head bobbed from side to side.
"Mountain's moving too fast.  Might not be able to get back."

"I see," Razi said thoughtfully.  "Well, if you change your mind---for
anyone---I'm sure the captain would be grateful if you let him know."

The condor tilted her head to study Razi, as if trying to decide
whether he was a rabbit or a tiger.  "Ehp," she finally squawked,
meaning "yes" or "no", or "silly mammal, I already knew that" or
perhaps something entirely bird-ish that Erileine wouldn't have
understood.

She followed Razi down ten flights of stairs to the main floor,
breaking into a trot in places to keep up with the bookster's
long-legged stride.  "Was his jacket magic?" she asked when the
bookster finally slowed down enough for conversation.

"I'm afraid so," the bookster said over his shoulder.  "Have you ever
seen magic before?"

"Sure, a couple of times.  When Fraederiq---" Erileine swallowed.
"Fraederiq broke his arm when we were little.  We were playing dares
on a swing rope, trying to see who could get the highest, and he fell
off.  Gaeston walked up here to get the captain's wife, and she came
and did a spell so that Fraederiq's arm would mend straight." She saw
no reason to add that Fraederiq's father had waited almost a week.  By
the time she reached Starboard Town, his son had been drenched in
fever, and his arm had been mottled.  That had been just a few months
after Fraederiq's mother had left; Fraederiq's arguments with his
father had started almost as soon as he was well enough to stand
again.  "And there was a rock slide a couple of years ago when we
berthed in Mau Ngapcha.  The captain hired a Bantangui to make the
rocks dance themselves into a pile.  He used one of my paere's
flutes."

The bookster nodded.  "Well, unless the world has turned upside down
in the last ten years, you're going to see some more magic done today.
And *la*, there he is.  I'm surprised he doesn't hire a stage and a
crier so that the whole town can watch."

Thomas stood at the bottom of the broad steps in front of the Hardeck.
His brocade jacket hung in the air beside him, as if on an invisible
coat rack.  The market-day crowd had already formed a half-circle in
front of him.  They watched, hushing one another, as he folded a sheet
of creamy blue paper.

"What's he doing?" Erileine whispered.

Razi rolled his eyes.  "Performing," he said in a normal voice.  "He
lives for it, truly.  See?"

Sure enough, Thomas had folded the piece of paper to make a toy bird
small enough to nestle in the palm of his hand.  He raised it to his
lips and blew on it gently.  Its tiny wings fluttered, then flapped.
It rose from his palm and circled his head like a strange blue wasp.
A few people applauded.  Thomas whistled sharply.  The bird shot away
westward.  "Show-off," Razi grunted.

Thomas raised his arms over his head and whistled again.  His coat
flapped as if caught in a strong wind to settle neatly on his
shoulders.  Before Erileine's astonished eyes, the buttons did
themselves up.  Thomas smiled broadly as a few more people applauded,
then strolled toward the closest stall like a princess inspecting her
stables.

"Idiot." Razi shook his head.  "*La*, Erileine, truly, there is no one
as stupid as a clever man." He gathered his *deel* around him with one
hand and strode away.

Erileine followed him through the end-of-day bustle of the market
closing up.  Some vendors were disconsolately wrapping up the entire
stock they had brought that morning.  Buckles and straps for climbing
harnesses, copper jewelry set with colored glass, embroidery
thread---the worried Avauntois had barely glanced at them.  Those
selling onions, sacks of rice, cured peppers, palm oil, and rabbit
traps, on the other hand, had nothing to take home except jingling
strings of coins.  Some had raised their prices five times before
noon, and five times again before sunset.  "Scandalous!" people
exclaimed, but they paid.

Razi had to stop every dozen strides to let Erileine catch up.  When
they finally reached the narrow streets on the market's other side,
Razi glanced at her.  "So, do you know the way, or shall we ask
someone for directions?"

"I know the way."  But then the question that had been swelling in
Erileine's mind spilled out.  "Bookster---did you know the mountain
was going to change course?"

Her teacher blinked.  "By all the saints who laugh---whatever gave you
that idea?"

"I don't know." But Erileine *did* know, and somehow the ache in her
muscles from day's long walk gave him the courage to say, "It
just---it seems like too much for coincidence.  You coming here, and,
you know, what Thomas said." She shrugged uncomfortably.

Razi nodded.  "*La*, you mean the fact that I have worked for someone
as famous for meddling in the world as Lady Kembe?"

Erileine shrugged again.  "And the other night, when you said you were
meditating.  I heard you talking to someone, but there wasn't anyone
else in the room."

"*La*, that." Razi sighed.  "It had been a day for stories and
secrets, hasn't it? So, I will share one more with you, though I must
ask you to keep it to yourself.  You don't have to," he continued,
raising a hand to forestall whatever Erileine had been about to say.
"If you decide the captain really ought to know, then of course you
will tell him.  But..." He lowered his hand.  "It may be
nothing---just a grain of sand in her shoe.  *La*, and if she had any
name but her own, no one would pay it any attention.  I will therefore
ask you to think carefully before repeating what I tell you."

He waited, a lean dark figure in desert brown, standing in the early
evening half-light on a narrow cobbled street a thousand gallops from
the city of his birth, while his apprentice wrestled with her
conscience.  Finally Erileine nodded.  "All right."

"Thank you.  Lady Kembe has dreams sometimes, dreams that are more
than dreams.  These last few years, they have shown her people falling
from a great height and a shadow moving across the land.  It could
mean nothing.  It usually has, in the past---divination is a chancy
thing.  But still, better to search and not find than not to search.
Since she cannot come here herself..."  He turned his palms up.  "Here
I am."

Erileine scowled.  "So the captain was right.  You *are* her fetch."

Razi's hand was suddenly on Erileine's collar.  "I will say it again,"
he told his apprentice calmly.  "I am nobody's fetch, and never have
been.  Lady Kembe has done this world greater service than it
knows---*la*, greater than it deserves, I sometimes think---but if she
ever tried to bend my will, I would write her name on the wall just so
that I could piss on it.  I do this for her because if she is, then I
am afraid.  And if a smiling tapeworm like Thomas is crawling around
as well, then I am doubly afraid, because where she would act to keep
the world in balance, he would look only to see what advantage he
might find." He let go of Erileine's collar and smoothed it down.
"Now, let us find your father.  Half the mountain is here today, and
if we do not claim beds for ourselves soon, *la*, we will have to
perch upstairs with the birds."
