Piaerre was sitting at the top of the stairs that led down to his
grandfather's cottage, watching the unfamiliar peaks and hating himself,
when Niquolas said, "Hoy," behind him hesitantly. Piaerre grunted
without lifting his chin off his knees.

"Whatcha doing?" Niquolas asked.

"Thinking,"

"Oh." There was a pause while Niquolas digested that. "What about?"

Piaerre shrugged, then sighed (just loud enough to be heard) when
Niquolas sat down beside him.

"You ever wonder what it's like down there?" the older boy asked. When
Piaerre didn't answer, Niquolas continued, "All those cities we never
see---I bet they don't all look after goats 'n' pull up weeds."

"Bet they do." Piaerre wiped his nose on the knee of his trousers.
"Someone has to."

"Doesn't mean it has to be us. Me and Fraedi... Here, look." He pulled
something dark and hairy out of his shoulder bag and held it out.

Piaerre looked at it sidelong, but made no move to take it. A little
larger than his two fists put together, covered in coarse, dark fibers,
with cut-out diamonds for eyes and a ragged grin full of carved fangs...
"What the cake is that?"

"It's a head," Niquolas said proudly. "For a door soldier. C'mon, you
remember---I was going to trade some of 'em to the Hett for that thing
Fraedi wanted."

"Oh. Right."

"We got the coconuts out of the trash after Departure Eve, and we've
been carving them all different ways. Well, mostly I've been carving,
but a lot of the ideas were Fraedi's. He figured we could get half a
ring each for them in Normous, on account of them being novelty items.
Maybe more, if we had time to make some helmets for them or something."

"Mm." Piaerre turned back to the mountains.

After a moment's hesitation, Niquolas put the coconut head back in his
bag. "Now that he's... Well, I was wondering if..."

Piaerre stood up abruptly. "I have to get up to the library," he said.
"The bookster will be expecting me."

Niquolas scrambled to his feet. "Right." He raised a hand in a half-wave
to Piaerre's back. "Suppose that's more important."

As Piaerre reached the first bend in the path, he glanced back. Niquolas
was still standing at the top of the stairs, staring at the peaks below.
Suddenly remorseful, Piaerre opened his mouth to call out. As he did so,
Niquolas pulled the carved coconut from his bag and threw it off the
mountain.
