And then, Question 29: *Shall This Assembly Resolve That the Number of
Indwellers Permitted on the Mountain Outwith Berthing-Times Shall Not
Exceed Eight Hundreds?* He read it through carefully. It never mentioned
the Hett by name, but its authors left no doubt that the "indwellers"
they had in mind weren't people like Piaerre's grandfather. "Persons
most usually employed in menial trades, such as street sweepers,
nightsoil carters, peddlers, and scissor sharpeners." That was the
Hett---at least, the mountain-born Hett. They knew their place; they kept
their eyes down when the Avauntois spoke to them, and laughed when
someone made a joke at their expense. If it rankled, well, what of it?
It was no worse than the way the rest of Cherne treated their wandering
cousins.

But over the last few years, a growing number of those wanderers had
fetched up on Avaunt. Ten years ago, only a few hundred Hett had called
the flying mountain home. Now, there were a thousand. "Or more," a few
people muttered darkly. "Can't just be chance, and there can't be any
good in it."

Those mutterings had turned to arguments in Forecastle's taverns.
Finally, the captain had ordered the loudest hotheads to put the
question to the Parledoux. His chief clerk had been politely negative
after the reading, but its authors were not deterred. Fortified with a
few glasses of Enswer cider, they vowed to rewrite it, and bring it
forward again.

Until that afternoon, the debate had largely passed Piaerre by. As far
as he was concerned, the Hett consisted of the half-dozen families that
came to Starboard Town each fall to help with the charcoaling, and
tinkers like Vaszlav. The tinker's little stall, with its pins, springs,
and screws, had seemed half-magical when Piaerre was little. Later, when
he had mastered his letters well enough to read on his own, the books
that Vaszlav brought from Forecastle to rent out to Starboard Town's
inhabitants became Piaerre's salvation and refuge. They were less
important now, but he still felt that he owed the old man something. He
could only guess how many hours Vaszlav had spent badgering Forecastle's
booksellers to get them to entrust this book or that to a Hett...
