Greensday, Peridot 14^th^. Starboard Town woke to discover that the
mountain had sped up during the night. The steady half-gallop-an-hour
breeze of its passage had had become a steady wind that blew people's
hair back, rattled doors, and made chickens restless in their coops.
Branches rustled against each other nervously, while overhead, the
town's kites jerked on their strings as if trying to escape.

For the people gathering in front of Mamaere Mayeule's, the mountain
speeding up somehow felt worse than it changing direction. The steady
whisper of the wind flying past it had been part of their lives from
the day they were born. Now it seemed to be saying, "Trouble is on his
way."

"It ain't right," Donaien said to Armaend, staring out their kitchen
window, the morning's chai cooling in a pot on the table between them.

Armaend shook his head. "Ain't right at all." He stirred some honey
into his mug and drained it in one noisy gulp. "Come on. Time to go."

Erileine and her father were almost the last ones to arrive.  FIXME
had spotted a stain on Laeuc's shirt too faint to be seen by male eyes
and insisted that he change. And while your father's doing that,
Erileine, can't you please comb your hair? Yes, I know you're going to
be wearing a hat all day, what has that got to do with it?
Honestly...

"There's Razi," Erileine said. "Can we walk with him?"

"Sure." Laeuc nodded hellos to his friends, some as fresh as he was,
others, like the bosun, bleary-eyed and grumpy.

Forecastle was only four gallops for Jack the parrot, but the narrow
track that connected it to Starboard Town was as twisted as an
arthritic snake. It would take the Starboard Towners most of the day
to get to Forecastle; they would have only a couple of hours in the
market before the sun set, then another hour or two the next day
before starting the return journey.

"Right," the bosun said loudly. "Those coming, let's be off. The rest
of you, don't get into any trouble while I'm not here to enjoy it."
With no more ceremony than that, he shouldered his pack and set off.

It seemed to Erileine as though everyone who wasn't actually going was
up to see the travelers leave. Seized by sudden misgivings, a few
people pulled on boots and coats, kissed their husbands or wives
goodbye, and joined the flock trailing after the bosun.

Standing in his doorway, Gaeston watched them go by impassively. Laeuc
waved and said good morning, but Gaeston made no reply. From the look
of his hair and clothes, he hadn't washed since his son's funeral; the
dark green bottle in his hand could have been half full or half empty.
He watched the little parade go by, then went back inside to his
lonely anger.

Half a gallop out of town, past the last beanfield, conversation died
as Forecastle Road climbed a dark shoulder of granite to the town's
upper goat pasture.  A pair of red-billed steelbirds kept pace with
them for a time, clacking their beaks to warn the Avauntois away from
their nest.  Boot soles clomped on stone while the wind slipped cold
fingers down the travelers' collars, toying with their scarves and
rustling the branches around them.

Erileine was sweating by the time they reached the pasture. Pine
branches woven through sturdy uprights closed off two of its
sides. Goats bleated behind the prickly wall, their brown and white
coats half-visible through the barrier. The cliff that formed the
pasture's third side was too steep even for them to climb, although a
creeping vine from the jungle below Mau Ngapcha had made a nest just
out of reach of their hungry mouths. Erileine paused a moment to watch
it wave its sweetly-scented flowers at a rabbit. Come closer, come
closer, they seemed to beckon. Come to me... The rabbit scampered
away.

The road narrowed beyond the pasture, forcing the townspeople to walk
single file.  It cut back and forth like Slip Street as it climbed.
"Need to fix that," the bosun grunted, shaking a wobbly pine railing
with his hand.  Laeuc just nodded.  Despite his protests, Elaiene had
insisted that he carry waterproofs for himself and Erileine, and he
was puffing under their weight.  He'd walked to Forecastle and back in
a single day once to get his wife a naming day present.  He didn't
remember it being so hard then...

They stopped to rest when the road leveled off. Erileine turned and
looked back the way they had come. All he could see of Starboard Town
was the roof of the Captain's House and a few household kites. In the
distance, a herd of clouds was raining on the plains below. *At least
_they_ have water*, Erileine thought.

"Do you think they know?" he asked no one in particular. "Down below, I
mean. That we're off course?"

"They know," the bosun said firmly. "Can't move a mountain around
without people noticing."

Razi nodded. Despite the die-hard patches of snow lurking among the
rocks, his feet were bare in his thick-soled desert sandals, though he
had tied the wrist strings of his *deel*, and belted it more tightly
around his waist to keep the warmth in. "*La*, it will be like the
tale of the camel in the crib. There will be meetings---kings and
princes, ministers and magicians, all twittering at each other like
birds.  What does it mean, who will advantage by it...  Heh." He
sniggered like a little boy who has heard a dirty joke.

"Glad you find it funny," Donaien said a little sourly. "Can't say I
see the joke myself."

Razi spread his hands. "I am sorry to give offense. But I spent some
time as a clerk below the court at Armaq when I was younger, and oh,
they are all so serious. Even when there is nothing they can do, they
must write each other letters." He laughed suddenly. "*La*, perhaps
*especially* when there is nothing they can do.  Like the King of
Nyengmo and the three pigs. Do you know the story?"  Donaien shook his
head. "No? Well, if I may as we walk?"

Donaien shouldered his pack and waved Razi on. "After you."

Razi dipped his head. "Thank you. Now, many of my stories are not
true, but this is a true story. The king in question, Phuntsok, was a
very fat man..."

A hundred strides later Erileine's ears were burning. She was glad her
mother wasn't there, although the women within earshot were laughing
as hard as the men. When Razi started imitating voices---the squeaky
Minister of Law, saying that the pigs would have to marry, and the
stuttering Minister of Rumors, saying that her desk had never been so
clean---the bosun had to lean against trees and hold his sides.

"So you see," Razi finished, ducking a low-hanging branch, "You are
very lucky, here on your mountain. You have a captain, *la*, who is
wise enough to know that if he cannot steer his ship, he should not
pretend to, and a bosun in each town to make sure children spend their
days pulling up weeds instead of getting into trouble---"

"Or both," the bosun said, still chuckling.

"*La*, or both," Razi agreed.  "But please, I have burdened you with a
story---perhaps I could carry one of yours in return?"

"Do you know how Papaere Vurt lost his foot?" Erileine asked before
anyone else could speak. When Razi shook his head, Erileine pointed up
the mountain's side. "It was up there, in one of the old tunnels.
Bosun Uyves' father was there---he was a bosun's mate, wasn't he?"

"That he was," Uyves said, wiping the damp off his moustache. "It was,
what, forty years ago? Forty-one, now..."

*The bonescuttle whose skull would eventually hang above Vurt's
fireplace was what brought him to Avaunt.  They were patient
creatures, slow-moving until prey was in reach, then as fast as a
striking snaek. No one knew how this one had found its way onto the
mountain---an egg lying unnoticed in a sack of chocolate beans,
perhaps, or some angry Bantangui merchant trying to sabotage a
rival. It just appeared one day, fully grown and very hungry.*

*It took goats at first, dragging them back to its lair to dismember.
Then it took a Hett boy, the son of tinkers who had made camp outside
Forecastle. A few people said, "Better them than our goats," and more
thought it without saying it, but they all knew that the bonescuttle
wouldn't care whether the next child was Hett or not.*

*So Forecastle bosun and several of his mates went hunting.  Tracking
the bonescuttle was easy, but when the trail led to the mouth of an
old tunnel, he and his men stopped. Like all Avauntois, they had spent
their lives under an open sky, with the whole world spread out below
them.  They stored trade goods in the shallowest tunnels, but the
thought of going into their depth... Of having such a weight of stone
over their heads... No. Unable to meet one another's eyes, they turned
back. This wasn't a job for an Avauntois.*

*Vurt was twenty-four then. His parents had been taken the year before
when scribbling fever swept across the Karaband. They had left him a
small house and a rat catching business whose clients were as poor as
themselves.*

*Unable to bear the house's emptiness, Vurt sold it for half what it
had been worth a year before---it was a poor market, when so many
stood empty.  He was on his way to Tomb Hill to look for work as a
caravan guard when he saw a palace clerk painting a notice on the wall
in Six Ears Square. The Captain of Avaunt...  a bonescuttle...
passage there and back to be provided by the emir to any qualified
applicant...  He looked up at the blue sky over his head, and thought,
why not? He'd killed one of the things before.*

*The next morning, he found himself on the back of a small cloud,
sweating in the heavy coat and fleece-lined trousers that the
cloudherd swore he would need once they got higher.  He cried out in
wonder and fear when the cloud rose into the air. He had played on
Coriandel's rooftops, and climbed trees, but this---this was how the
sun and the moon saw the world.*

* "First time?" the cloudherd asked.*

*"Yup."*

*"Well, if you're going to sick up, do it over the side. Squabbles
here hates being puked on."*

*The mountain swelled as they approached it. Its irregular peak was
stone gray and ice bright; its lower reaches were dense with
vegetation. And there, directly ahead, a town clung to its side like a
burr to a camel.*

*The cloudherd set him down in a goat pasture. Bunched together at the
fence in the hope that he might have carrot greens for them, the goats
watched as he shouldered his bags and went looking for someone who
could tell him what he was supposed to do as the cloud lifted off once
again.*

*The first villager Vurt met didn't speak Karabandi. Neither did the
second, or the third. It wasn't until he pulled a steel trap out of
his bag and waved it in their faces that the Avauntois realized their
savior had arrived.*

*It didn't take Vurt long to realize how much the Avauntois disliked
the tunnels. Truth be told, he didn't like them either. They reminded
him of the night he had spent beneath Coriandel, hunting his first
bonescuttle.  The way their floors and walls and ceilings were tilted
made it worse: at some point in the distant past, the mountain had
tipped back so that floor were angled ramps and stairs were saw-edged
traps.*

*Vurt was setting the last of his traps when word came that the
bonescuttle had taken another goat. Grim-faced, Starboard Town's bosun
led Vurt to the scene. The creature had cut through the thorny wall
around the pasture. A drying pool of blood showed where it had caught
hold of its prey. More blood speckled a shallow furrow that led to
half of the goat's remains.*

*Vurt put his hand on the still-warm carcass and looked helplessly at
the woods around them. He had spent his whole life in the desert---he
didn't know how to track something among trees. "What way go?"  he
asked the bosun in bad Gandan-o.*

*The bosun pointed. Vurt stood and wiped his hand on his
trousers. "I follow."*

*The trail led to a tunnel mouth. The bushes growing around it seemed
undisturbed, but scratches on the stones showed where the creature had
sharpened its pincers.*

*Vurt unslung his crossbow. Its quarrels were tipped with steel barbs
that hooked cruelly backward. His father had bought them years before
but never used them. He ran a quick loop of spider silk through the
eyelet at the quarrel's base, knotted it, and handed the coil to the
bosun. "Good?" Vurt asked.*

*The bosun shook his head. "No. Let's go."*

*Twenty strides in, Vurt raised his hand to signal stop. Up ahead, he
heard the sound of pincers stripping flesh from a goat's leg to make
morsels small enough for a tiny mouth.*

*Vurt tapped the bosun on the shoulder. "I loud, you pull, yes?" he
whispered, twitching the silk line trailing from his quarrel to
illustrate.*

*The bosun raised his fist to his ear and nodded. Hoping that meant,
"I understand," Vurt edged forward gingerly, one foot on the tilted
floor, the other on the steeply-angled wall beside it.*

*The sound ahead of him suddenly stopped. Vurt raised his crossbow to
his shoulder and thumbed open the shutter on his little dayglass
lantern.*

*The bonescuttle froze in the sudden light, blinking its too-human eyes.
Its scorpion tail twitched above its back, and then it charged.*

*Vurt fired. The quarrel hit the bonescuttle with a crack. "Pull!"
Vurt yelled. "Pull pull pull!" He swung his crossbow at the
bonescuttle's head like an ax as the bonescuttle caught his left leg
with its pincer.*

*Vurt screamed and fell backward as the bosun and his men dragged the
bonescuttle on top of him. He covered his head with his arms as its
fleshless legs stabbed the stone on either side of him, then drove his
knife up between the plates on the creature's belly. Screaming in
terror and fury, he pulled his knife free and stabbed it again and
again.*

*The next thing he knew, the bosun was dragging him out of the tunnel.
"Is it? Is it?" Vurt gasped, not knowing the Gandan-o for "dead".*

*One of the men held up the bonescuttle's severedhead. Vurt nodded and
fainted.*

*The emir's doctress in Coriandel could have saved his nearly-severed
leg. The Avauntois in Starboard Town couldn't. Vurt lay in bed shaking
with fever for a week. When he woke, a woman was sitting on a stool
beside his cot, grinding herbs with a pestle and mortar. She soaked
the bandages on his stump in warm water to loosen them, then unwrapped
them slowly and carefully so that she could pack more herbs onto the
bloody ruin below his knee. He said, "Thank you" in Karabandi, and
slept again.*

*By the time he could stand he had learned how to say, "Thank you," in
Gandan-o, and a great many other things as well. They sat for hours on
the wodden deck behind the small house the town had loaned him,
looking down the steep, twist-back street to the world passing slowly
below.  Coriandel was three hundred gallops behind them. The desert
had given way to chaparral, which was itself turning into the forest
that covered the northern arch of the Brumoso Mountains. When Vurt
asked his nurse how to say, "I would like to marry you," she laughed
and kissed him for the first time.*

Razi nodded through the bosun's story, while Laeuc, Erileine, and
everyone else walking within earshot chipped in with corrections and
elaborations.  "*La*, and no one ever found out where the creature
came from?"

Uyves glanced at Laeuc. "Not that I ever heard of."

Laeuc shook his head. "Nor me.  After he was walking, Vurt went back
into the tunnel to bring out the bones of the Hett boy.  Never heard
him that say he found anything else."

"I didn't know he went back," Erileine said.

The bosun shrugged. "No reason to think the boy would turn haunt, but
no point taking chances."

The travelers fell silent after that. They were above the treeline,
and each breath was a cloud of steam that turned to tiny ice crystals
in people's nostrils. Everyone except Razi had put on gloves and
pulled the flaps of their hats down over their ears.

Despite the cold, the view was magnificent. Crabby old patches of ice
dazzled white in the early afternoon sun. Below, gray stone and
green-brown moss gave way to dwarf pines, sea-blue spruce, and braided
pines, their triple trunks twined together. A little melt-stream
called splashed foam-white through tiny rapids to fall into the small
pool made by an ancient dam, then tumbled down the mountain once again
to fall into space, a tiny echo of the rivers that legend said fell
into infinity over the side of the world.

"Who's that down there?" Donaien pointed to the campground next to the
dam. Erileine caught a glimpse of a two bent figures hurrying into the
trees, shouldering their heavy packs as they went.

"*La*, is that not the tinker and his apprentice?" Razi asked.

Bosun Uyves scowled. "Aye. Probably spent the night here. He knows
that's not allowed."

Razi's eyebrows went up fractionally. "No?"

"Nope. Law says they can't settle anywhere on the mountain."

Razi's eyebrows climbed even further. "And camping overnight in such a
place is considered 'settling'?"

"Anywhere there's stonework," Donaien said, before the bosun could
reply. He spat off the side of the road. "That's the law, not that it
counts for much these days. One of them owns a whole house now in
Forecastle.  Captain pretends not to see, but---"

"What the captain sees and doesn't see isn't for you or me to have
words about," the bosun said sharply. "I'll gnaw on Vaszlav's ear the
next time he's in town. You want to make any more out of it, take it
to the Debates. Now, come on. I'm hungry."

As the travelers picked their way down to the campground the Hett had
just fled, Razi stopped a moment to adjust his sandal strap,
straightening up as Erileine went past. "*La*, so, are you in the mood
for a history lesson?" the bookster asked.

"Sure. I mean, yes, thank you, bookster."

"So, the tale begins with Yegor the First, who was king in Uws when
your people came to the mountain." The bookster pushed a branch out of
his way, his voice slipping into its familiar lecturing tone. "He gave
the Hett refuge, and appointed several to his council. His son,
however---this is Yegor the Second, also called Yegor the Sharp---he
believed the Hett knew the lost secrets of the Pilots, so when he put
on the collar, he demanded that they tell him. When they said they
knew no more than anyone else, he ordered them expelled. 'By evening
three days hence,' according to the official chronicle, 'They shall be
outwith the borders of our kingdom, taking no more than they
brought.'"

"So what happened?" Erileine asked.

The bookster sighed. "*La*, having been driven from their homes once
already, the Hett felt disinclined to obey. They put up barricades,
and fought with all the fury of people who have no more to lose. Which
was perhaps the Sharp's goal all along. The Sarkoszys were no longer
as secure upon their throne as they had been. He would not have been
the first king to find himself in need of an enemy. The Hett were
already unpopular---they were better smiths than the Uwsians, and many
had grown wealthy. Once the first stones were thrown, the rest..."

He paused a moment, his eyes focused on the distance. "Those who fled
north into Ruuda were taken apart by the Pale Remainder. Those who
went south to Praczedt, *la*, wherever they went, they found Yegor the
Sharp's story of their 'secret knowledge' waiting for them."

"Sounds like you have a soft spot for the Hett." Laeuc's voice behind
them gave Erileine a jolt. How long had her father been listening?

But Razi was unperturbed. "They are an interesting people. *La*,
merely the fact that they *are* a people, after centuries without a
home, makes them interesting."

"Well, best to keep that interest to yourself, at least in company."
Laeuc nodded at the campground ahead of them, where a double dozen
Starboard Towners were already eating hard bread and dried fruit.
Donaien, Armaend, and the bosun had a fire going, and were talking in
low voices as they waited for their kettle to boil. "Most people don't
feel as charitable toward them as you do."

"Of course." Razi dipped his head. "I shall endeavor to be more
circumspect in future." Which was not, Erileine thought, the same
thing as saying that he'd stop talking about it.
