Yellowsday, Peridot 13^th^, dawned clear and cold. Most days did on
Avaunt.  Except during storms, the only clouds that flew higher than
the mountain were old gray bulls spread so thin that they could hardly
be seen.

But there were no bulls in the sky that morning, no stately white
heifers pillowed on top of one another, no streaky calves barely able
to hold themselves together. There was just the sky paling to gray as
the sun rose in the wrong place.

Erileine lay in bed and watched her curtain slowly brighten. It had
taken her hours to fall asleep. If she had just put out her hand...
Fraederiq's weight might have pulled her off the mountain, but maybe
that would have been better. Maybe then she'd be able to close her
eyes without starting to cry again.

She twitched at the sound of a lammergeier calling somewhere high
above, threw back her quilt, and stood up. She wasn't getting back to
sleep, so she might as well make tea for her parents and sister.

As the sun rose, the people of Starboard Town gathered at a walled
garden on the hill behind the Captain's House. It was a quiet, tidy
place, overlooked by the blue maples and braided pines that the
townspeople planted on their children's naming days. People took pride
in being able to point to their grandfather's grandmother's tree.
"Still straight and tall," they would say, not knowing that the beams
in Starboard Town's first houses had been made from the naming day
trees of the Hett who had lived there before them.

Everyone wore their best clothes, but came barefoot. No one knew
why---it was just how things were done. Women brought babies on their
hips, while the town's oldest man, Papaere Badette, was carried up the
hill in a wicker chair. Wrapped in a long black coat whose wide
sleeves had gone out of style thirty years before, he looked like a
strange, solemn bird.

The bosun had worked since midnight to build a pyre of pine logs on
the heavy gray stone at the center of the garden. He stood beside it
in the blue coat and trousers of his office, his square black hat
tucked under his arm, and nodded to people as they took their places
at the wall. No one spoke except the smallest children, who were
immediately hushed.

Gaeston was the last to arrive. In his hands he held a stuffed toy
goat, a tiny pair of sandals whose soles had been worn thin by
countless adventures in the village's gardens, and the embroidered
shirt that Fraederiq had worn on his sixteenth naming day a few months
before. Erileine's heart twisted at the sight of it. He remembered
Fraederiq standing as straight as a piece of bamboo while he swore to
observe Avaunt's laws and obey the captain and his appointed officers
in peril of his soul's rest. He had stumbled a little over the oath,
but had nearly split his cheeks smiling when the bosun clapped him on
the shoulder and ordered him to turn out for militia practice with the
other men.

Gaeston set Fraederiq's things on the pitch-smeared logs. Moving as
stiffly as a marionette, he took a blue silk hair ribbon from his
pocket. As he laid it on the pyre, Erileine heard Laeuc whisper, "But
that's---!"

"Sh!" FIXME elbowed her husband to quiet him, but her eyes were with
Erileine's on Que√ßenne, whose renewed sobbing told the whole town who
the hair ribbon had belonged to.

Gaeston stepped back and saluted the bosun. Uyves returned the salute
gravely. Hungry and cold, a baby began to cry. "What? What?"  Papaere
Badette asked. His granddaughter shushed him gently.

Gaeston took the smoldering torch the bosun handed him and touched it
to the logs. The crowd held its breath.  The flame hesitated a moment,
then began to spread.  Everyone exhaled with relief, except the hungry
baby, who was still crying. The flame had caught. Fraederiq was at
rest.

As dark smoke wrote its message of loss and grief on the sky, the
bosun cleared his throat.  "When I die, I shall give back to the world
all that I did not do. All that I might have been and wasn't, all the
things I lost and spent and wasted, I shall give them back to the
lives that haven't been lived yet. That will be my thanks to those I
loved, and to the world that gave me the life."

Around him, the people of Starboard Town bowed their heads and
murmured, "That will be my gift." In twos and threes and families,
they turned toward home, leaving Gaeston to tend his son's last fire.

Laeuc put his hand on Erileine's shoulder and squeezed. "Come on."

Erileine shook her head. "I want to stay."

Her father shook her gently. "This isn't for you, love. It's for
Gaeston."

Erileine wiped her eyes on her sleeve. "I know," she said wretchedly,
his throat aching from the effort of not sobbing. "I'm sorry. I should
have--- I---"

"Sh." Her father gently shook her again, dry-eyed, but as miserable as
his daughter. "It wasn't your fault. You can come back later and help
clean up the ashes if you want. All right?" Gently but firmly, Laeuc
turned her toward home.

Most people spent that morning repairing the minor damage the
mountain's shudders had caused. They talked about Fraederiq: what a
shame, so young, what would Gaeston do now, it would be terrible if he
started drinking again.  It was almost with relief that conversation
turned to the mountain.  Where do *you* think we're going?  And
shouldn't we do something, just in case?  Well no, I don't know what,
but surely there's something.  Yes, I'm sure the captain's thought of
all of this, but...

Just after noon, when most people were sitting down to soup and fried
squash, a blue and yellow parrot settled on the sill of Bosun Uyves'
front window. He cocked his head one way, then the other. Satisfied
that none of the town's cats were anywhere nearby, he rapped his beak
sharply against the window's shutter. "Uyves!" he squawked. "Uyves,
open up!"

Inside, a feminine voice whispered a panicky question. A deeper voice
answered. There was the sound of clothes hastily being donned, then a
creak as a rear door opened and closed. A moment later, the shutter
flew open.

"Clear day, Jack," the bosun said brightly, buttoning his shirt.

"Clear day," the parrot replied. He imitated a cough. "Sorry for
interrupting."

"Ah, not to worry." The bosun leaned on the sill.  "Just consoling
those as need it."

"Of course," the parrot said drily.

Uyves watched the kites flying overhead for a moment. "You sharing
your nest with anyone these days, Jack?"

The parrot bobbed his head. "Aye. She came on board at Mau Ngapcha."

"Oh? Well, good for you. Mind me asking what her name is?"

"Doesn't have one. She's not Gifted."

"No?"

"Nope." Jack's version of shaking his head was two quick twitches left
and right. "It ain't as common as stories would have you believe."

"Mm. Well, then it's a good thing you lot don't mind having ungifted
mates."

Jack scratched the side of his head with a claw. "Aye. And I suppose
it's a good thing for you that so many women on Avaunt feel the same
way."

The bosun's laugh nearly filled the street.

Ten minutes later, he stood at the top of Slip Street, his hat firmly
on his head. "Gather all, gather all!" he bellowed, pounding the
town's assembly drum in time with his words. "Gather all and hearken!"

The townspeople assembled quickly. A few said hellos to the parrot, who
bobbed his head at them in return from his perch on the Captain's House
gate.

"Morning, Jack." Mamaere Mayeule held out her hand. "Dried plum?"

"Don't mind if I do," the parrot said, deftly beaking it off her palm.

"Right, quiet down," the bosun said to the crowd. "Jack here has word
from the captain. Jack?"

"Thank you, bosun." The parrot spread its wings and settled them
again. "Well. You all know what happened yesterday.  That means you
know as much as anyone does. The captain had no warning, and doesn't
know where we're headed. We could be back on course tomorrow, or not."

He raised his voice over the crowd's murmurs. "The immediate problem
is water. There's enough in the tanks to get us through to Carnelian,
or even to Chalcedony, but only if we're careful about how much we
use. So, orders are," his voice changed to imitate the captain's, "No
water for vanity gardens, or for boiling dyes or dagging wool."

The crowd's murmurs grew louder. "I know, I know," Jack said in his
own voice. "But until we have a better idea of what's happening, those
are his orders."

"Do you want us to stop bathing, too?" a voice called out.

The bosun spoke up quickly. "What difference would that make to you,
Donaien?"

A few people laughed. Donaien crossed his arms and scowled. Beside
him, his husband Armaend asked, "What about evacuation?"

The crowd stilled. "What about it?" Jack asked.

"You said we'd be all right until Chalcedony, but what if we haven't
berthed somewhere by then? Even if we stop watering the fields, we'll
be dry by Tourmaline. What happens then?"

Jack fixed his beady stare on Armaend. "Nobody is going to evacuate
anything," the parrot said. His rasping voice carried clearly on the
gentle midday breeze. "I've lived on this mountain eighty-three years,
chick and bird. It's always found berth, and until we see otherwise,
I'm going to trust it to find berth again."

"Easy for you to say," someone muttered behind Erileine. "You can
always just fly away."

Jack scratched the side of his head briskly with a claw. "So, unless
there are questions? Right. Bosun?"

Bosun Uyves' chest swelled as he took a deep breath. "Disss...missed!"

As the crowd began to break up, the parrot squawked, "Bookster? A
word?"  The Karabandi had been standing next to Erileine and her
family, a thoughtful expression on his face.

"Of course," Razi said. "Erileine?"

"*Sra*?"

Razi raised his eyebrows. "You *are* my apprentice, aren't you?"

Erileine glanced at her parents. "Go ahead," Laeuc said. Erileine
hurried after her teacher and the bosun into the Captain's House.

They gathered around a small map that Razi had found in a book on the
medicinal properties of fungi. "Not much room for us to get through,
is there?" the bosun said, tapping the inverted V's that marked the
Brumosos.

The bookster shrugged. "*La*, there are gaps and passes---perhaps we
will go through one of those.  *Sra* parrot, does the captain perhaps
have more detailed maps in Forecastle?"

"Don't know, but I'll ask. And just call me Jack, bookster. Never been
much of one for titles."

Razi inclined his head. "Jack, then. And if I might ask another
question?  The captain's wife---did she feel anything yesterday?"

The parrot shook his head. "Not that anyone's told me. But as far as I
know, her magic's about healing, so..."  He ruffled his wings in a
birdy shrug.

Razi closed the book and set it aside. "Well, please convey my
greetings to the captain, then. I hope you have an uneventful flight."

The bosun left with Jack on his shoulder. Erileine closed the door
behind them. "What do you think will happen if there isn't a pass big
enough?"  she asked.

Razi waggled his hands absent-mindedly. "*La*, who can know? The
mountain flies higher over Darp than it does at Mau Ngapcha or Gandan
Berth. Perhaps it will fly higher still when we reach the Brumosos. Or
perhaps crashing is the wrong way to think of it. Perhaps the mountain
is in season to mate."

He grinned boyishly at the look on Erileine's face. "Oh, come, I
cannot be the only one to think of that? Perhaps the mountain is like
a goat in spring. Stranger things have happened."

"Not around here," Erileine muttered, embarrassed.

Razi's grin softened. "*La*, well, just in case we survive, I think
you should keep working on your Praczny. I know it is not used so much
on the mountain as Gandan-o or Bantangui, but the exercise will do you
good. Here---see if you can find the word for 'pass'."

"Yes, *sra*." Erileine took the tattered blue-and-yellow Praczny
dictionary from its place on the shelf by the window, pulled the
dayglass lantern closer, and settled into her chair.

"Mountain," she said.  "A mass of rock that---um, hang on."  She
flipped the pages again, pursed her lips, and flipped back. "A mass of
rock that rises above its surroundings, and is bigger than a hill."
She glanced at the bookster. "So that's no help."

Razi nodded. "How about 'travel'? Or 'road'? *La*, one of those might
lead you to something that leads to 'pass'."

Piaerre looked at him in dismay. "But that could take forever!"

"Yes, it could." Razi slid another book back into its place on the
shelf. "But sometimes that's just what you have to do."

Erileine chased words all afternoon while Razi reshelved books. Every
once in a while he set a volume on the table instead to shape a rough
map of Cherne: those from Ruuda at the north end, those from Ini
Bantang and Barra Bantang at the south, the Ninety-Nine Kingdoms in
the west, and a scant handful from Praczedt and Thind to the east. A
lone volume of Karabandi poetry occupied the center.

The dozenth time Erileine looked up, two glinting pieces of brass
caught her eyes. "What are those for?"

"*La*, I thought to add some landmarks to my map. That one is for
Ossisswe. The other is Coriandel. You see?" Razi handed them to
Erileine. The first was square, with a lantern stamped on one side and
the date "1241" on the other. The second was round, with a hole
punched through it. A hatched pattern framed the hole on both sides,
put there, Erileine had learned, to deter trimmers from taking metal
off the coin's edges.

"Wait." Erileine replaced the coins, then fished a smooth gray pebble
out of her pocket that she had put there several days ago for some
now-forgotten reason. "Avaunt," she said, setting it down a double
handspan from the coins. It seemed very small.

They worked through the last of the afternoon, pausing only to answer
the call of nature. For a time, someone chopped firewood outside, and
someone else trundled a cart past the Captain's House, but the only
sounds in the library were those of pages being turned, and chairs
creaking as their occupants shifted their weight.

A knock on the door made them both start. "Hello?" Laeuc called as he
entered.  "Anyone aboard?"  He tousled his daughter's and looked
around.  "Saints, but there's a lot of books here, isn't there?"

"Well, it *is* a library," Erileine said.

"Ah. Right." One corner of Laeuc's mouth twitched. "Anyway, I just
came to say, a flock of us got to talking, and we've decided to head
up to Forecastle tomorrow to pick up a few things, just in case. I was
wondering if you would like to come along."

Razi pursed his lips, then nodded. "Certainly. I could use some more
ink and paper, and *la,* some fresh air would do my apprentice some
good."

"I'm sure it would," Laeuc agreed.  "We're wanting an early start---on
the road at dawn?"

"Of course," Razi agreed. He rolled his head to work the kinks out of
his neck.  "I shall see you then."

Walking home beside her father, Erileine suddenly asked, "What did you
mean, just in case?"

"Hm?"

"Back in the library. You said people were going up to Forecastle just
in case."

"Oh, that." Her father shrugged. "I don't know. People got to talking
about Vaszlav's last visit, and how they'd all wanted something he
didn't have, and, well, it just seemed like a good idea to get to the
market and pick up a few things."

"Oh.  Are maere and Que√ßenne coming too?"


Laeuc shook his head.  "I don't think Que√ßenne feels up to it right
now."

They walked the rest of the way home in silence. As they rounded the
big bend in Slip Street, Erileine caught sight of Niquolas emptying a
compost bucket in his family's back yard. She raised a hand to wave,
but Niquolas turned away and pretended not to see her.

After dinner was over and she had scraped the dishes clean, Erileine
went up to her room and slid under his quilt. She lay there for a
moment looking---really looking---at her room for the first time she
could remember.  The wood-and-leather toys on the shelf by the window
seemed to have shrunk. Maybe her mother was right: maybe it was time
to pass them on to someone else.

She tossed and turned for hours. When sleep finally came, it brought a
new nightmare. This time, Fraederiq and Niquolas were dangling her out
the upstairs back window at Mamaere Mayeule's. One boy held each of
her legs; each time she tried to grab the window sill, they relaxed
their grip for a moment, making her whimper with terror. It had
actually happened, a year or so ago. Niquolas had eventually said he
was tired of the game, and insisted that they pull her in. In her
dream, though, Erileine was hanging over the edge of the mountain.

She woke with a small cry. Dizzy with sweat, she fixed her eyes on her
dayglass night light and waited for dawn.
