Chaos ruled Forecastle.  Children and adults alike cried out in
terror.  Bosun's mates bawled for order as the militiamen in the
market square struggled back to their feet, tripping over one
another's spears.  Fallen lamps scattered shards of broken dayglass
like burning leaves.  People were thrown down stairs, losing teeth and
breaking arms.  Lintels cracked, roofs fell in, and a whole row of
warehouses on Butterjuggle Square collapsed.  Miraculously, both the
single old man asleep on guard and the young lovers who had snuck in
for some privacy walked away with nothing worse than scratches.

Rumors scampered around like rabbits.  The mountain had crushed an
entire town when it berthed.  Hundreds were dead, or none, or a
thousand vengeful Hett ghosts had come to eat everyone's souls.  The
magician Thomas had stolen the spell that kept the mountain flying,
and the captain wanted his head.

Adminst the confusion, Erileine jostled her way downstairs and ran
pell-mell back to the infirmary.  The bookster's face was drawn, but
he was sitting up.  He smiled when he saw his apprentice.  "*La*, once
again, history is being made around me, and all I want is a few quiet
moments with a night jar.  Please, help me up."

Erileine hurried to the bed.  Razi took hold of his apprentice's
shoulder and pulled himself to his feet.

"Are you sure you should be getting up?" Erileine asked anxiously.

The bookster pressed his free hand against his side.  "*La*, no, I am
most sure that I should not be.  But I will be all right unless the
good doctress finds out.  Now, help me upstairs"

They didn't even make it to the door before Nuu Ciy swept in like a
tiny, determined storm.  "Back to bed," she ordered sharply as she
threw open a cupboard and began piling bandages and bamboo splints in
the arms of her apprentices.

Razi straightened up.  "*La*, and miss the excitement?"

Nuu Ciy barely glanced at him, banging the cupboard door shut and
pulling open a drawer.  "All of them," she told her apprentices
brusquely, pointing at the knives and tongs that lay in polished
mahogany cases.  She turned back to the bookster.  "Now.  Or on my
blood, I'll give you a dose of poppy syrup that will keep you asleep
until the world melts away."

Razi nodded meekly in defeat.  "Come," he said to Erileine, shuffling
his feet as he turned around.  "Back to prison."

Erileine had to help Razi sit on the edge of the bed, then help him
again to lie flat.  "*La*, I am fine," the bookster winced.

"You don't *look* fine," Erileine said, secretly glad that the
captain's wife had caught them.  "Do you want some water?"

"Please.  *La*, wait." Razi shook his head.  "Not from the jug.  I
need my head clear.  Get it from over there.  You found us rooms?
Yes?  Well done.  Now, *la*, I must ask a small favor of you, and then
also a large one."

Erileine nodded, wiping the mug beside the bookster's bed with her
shirttail and re-filling it from the urn by the door.  "What do you
want?"

Razi swallowed a sip of water and coughed weakly.  "Goodness, that
hurts."  He rested the mug on his chest.  "There is a black leather
case with silver stitching in my pack, and a pair of candles.  And a
silver knife with a crystal handle.  Oh, and underclothes.  I really
should put on some clean underclothes."

Erileine hesitated.  "Are those your...your meditation candles?"

"You mean, am I going to cast a spell?" Razi shook his head.  "*La*, I
am afraid not.  Getting my things is just the small favor.  Using them
for me is the large one."

Erileine swallowed dryly.  "I'm not a magician."

Razi smiled weakly.  "Neither am I.  The spell is in the candles, and
in the picture that is in the case.  Lady Kembe paid their price when
she made them---you don't have to worry about your teeth falling out,
or having to stand on your head when you make water."

"I wasn't," Erileine lied.  "I just..." She shrugged.

Razi's eyes were tired but steady.  "She needs to know, Erileine.  She
can't help us if she doesn't know what has happened."

Erileine swallowed and nodded.  She had dreamed about being a
magician.  There wasn't a child in Cherne who hadn't.  When she was
little, she had imagined turning herself into a tiger or an elephant.
Later, she had daydreamed about having a giant's strength so that she
could settle the score with Fraederiq.  "What do I have to do?"  she
asked.

"Just light the candles and say some words.  That's all.  *La*, truly,
that's all." Razi closed his eyes.  Suddenly, surprisingly, he
chuckled.  "It's a pity I don't have anything to read.  This would be
a wonderful time to catch up."

Erileine slid his satchel off his shoulder, undid the drawstring, and
pulled out the collection of Praczny tales.  "How about this?" she
asked.

Razi took it from her flipped through the pages.  His eyebrows went
up.  "'Oh, Sieur Artan, the sun will burn out before I give my heart
to any man but you.'  Erileine, I would never have guessed your tastes
were so...purple."

Erileine felt her ears burning.  "It's for my maere and sister," she
mumbled.  "I thought I could read it to them.  For practice."

"*La*, yes, well..." Razi turned another page.  His eyebrows went up
even higher.  "You may want to read it through yourself before you do
so for them.  Some of the vocabulary is rather...advanced."

Erileine slipped out of the infirmary and hurried along the corridor.
None of the clerks and guards he passed took any notice of him.
Outside, half of the militia in the market square had managed to form
up, spearmen and archers side by side.  The rest were still milling
around, shouting for their companions or standing on tiptoe, waving to
be seen.  *They don't even have proper uniforms*, Erileine thought.
The spearmen wore vests and helmets of bootsole leather.  The soldiers
in Tinhead had all been in armor.

She shook his head.  Unshuttering the tiny hand lantern she'd taken
from the infirmary cupboard, she hurried back to the Sign of the Three
Rabbits.

It was locked.  Erileine thumped the inn's door drum over and over
again, but the old woman didn't appear.  She stepped back and looked
up at the little balcony.  If she could get up there, and if that door
wasn't locked...  But how?

"She went to stay with her son-by-marriage." Erileine whirled around
at the voice behind him.  The thief boy was standing a few strides
away in the mouth of the narrow alley that ran between the inn and the
house beside it.

"What are you doing here?" Erileine demanded.

The boy scowled.  "That's none of your business.  Now, do you want to
get in or not?"

Erileine opened her mouth to say 'no', and instead said, "Yes.  It's
really important.  The bookster needs his things."

The boy nodded.  "All right, I'll get them for you."

"Oh no you won't.  He told *me* to get them."

The boy crossed her arms.  "Fine.  Go ahead."

Erileine glowered at him.  "Look, just tell me where her
son-by-marriage lives, and I'll go get a key."

"Uh uh." He shook his head.

"I don't have time for this," Erileine muttered.  Without thinking,
she took a step toward the boy.  Instantly, he darted into the alley.

"Wait!" she shouted.  "Wait! Come back!" She ran to the alley, but
the thief had vanished.

"Great," she muttered.  She was right back where she had started.  If
she put one of the big planters beside the front door on top of the
other and stood on that...  She still wouldn't be able to reach the
balcony.  And anyway, how was she going to move the planter? It was
half as big as she was.  *Why can't people leave ladders lying around
like they do in stories?* she thought bitterly.

The balcony door opened above him.  The thief stepped out with Razi's
bag in his arms.  "Can you catch?" he asked.

* * *

The guards at the Hardeck's doors waved Erileine through.  Inside, the
confusion had ripened into a more purposeful kind of madness.
What-ifs had been replaced by orders given, clarified, countermanded,
and repeated.

The infirmary was as busy as a tavern on Departure Eve.  A pair of
nurses held a screaming clerk down while Nuu Ciy tried to get the
upper and lower halves of his shin to line up.  A woman with iron-gray
hair waited stoically on the next bed, the cloth she held over one eye
red and getting redder.

Amazingly, Razi was asleep, the book of Praczny stories open on his
chest.  Erileine set her teacher's bag on the floor and sat down
gingerly at the foot of the bed.  Razi's eyes opened.

"*La*, there you are." Razi yawned.  "Did you have any trouble?"

"Not really," Erileine said.  This didn't seem the right time to
explain how she had gotten the bag.  She had checked it, though, to
make sure everything was there.  When the boy protested, Erileine
said, "You told me yourself that you're a thief, remember?"

He had walked with her back to the Hardeck.  The closer they got to
the market square, the edgier he became, until he slipped away between
one step and the next.

Stiff and slow, Razi sat up, then stood.  "Quick," he whispered
loudly, using the bedpost to steady himself, "You distract the guards.
I'll make a shovel out of a feather and an eggshell, and we'll tunnel
our way to freedom."

"What?" Erileine blinked.  Had her teacher taken too much poppy tar?

Razi shook his head.  "*La*, never mind.  Let us escape while the
estimable doctress's attention is elsewhere, yes?"

In the confusion, 'escape' turned out to be no harder than walking out
the door.  The bookster picked up a dayglass lantern that someone had
left by the door, nodded regally at the guard hovering nearby, and
said, "Come along, then," over his shoulder to Erileine.  Just like
that, they were out in the corridor.

They found shelter in a narrow cubbyhole of an office.  The bookster
lowered himself creakily onto the stool behind the room's battered old
writing stand.

"Tie it closed," he ordered.  Piaere fastened the door shut as Razi
opened his bag and took out a cylinder of black leather as long and as
thick as his forearm.  Silver stitching decorated both of its ends and
the seam on its side.  A wooden box came next, and then the knife.
Its short silver blade had a single edge.  Its handle was a piece of
crystal, worn smooth like a pebble in a mountain stream.

Erileine licked her lips.  All the scene needed was a skull with
glowing eyes, a black rat in a wicker cage, and a Gifted troll named
Ygor rubbing his hands together malevolently, and it could have been
put on stage.  "So, what do I do?"

The first step was to take a sketch of Lady Kembe out of the tube and
pin it to the wall.  The woman it showed was as bald as Razi,
round-faced and full-lipped, with shoulders like a longshoreman's and
a pair of fiery wings tattooed on her neck.  She was sitting at a
plain wooden desk; a neat row of books stood watch on a shelf behind
her head, and an elaborate curlicue grill covered the window next to
it.

"That is the writing room in her house in Ossisswe," Razi said,
shaking two brass tacks out of the case and passing them to Erileine.
"The spell only work if she is there.  Luckily, *la*, she usually is."

Next, the candle.  There were two in the box, one half the length of
the other.  Erileine set the shorter one on the floor in front of the
picture.  "Do you want me to find some matches?"

Razi shook his head.  "There's no need.  If she hears us, she will
light it herself.  Now, take the knife.  You need to put three drops
of blood on the wick of the candle."

Like most doors in the Hardeck, the one behind Erileine was padded
with a thick piece of felt.  It muffled the voices, footsteps, and
confusion outside, making the office so quiet that Erileine could hear
herself breathe.

"It only has to be a scratch," Razi said gently.  "You've done worse
falling out of trees."

"I know," Erileine said.  The knife was very sharp.  She would barely
feel it.  It was the idea...  She took a deep breath and pressed the
edge against her forearm, then slumped.  "I don't think I can.  I'm
sorry."

"*La*, it's all right." Razi raised his palms to his apprentice.
"Just put it down.  She probably isn't even there right now."

Erileine nodded jerkily, then surprised herself and the bookster both
by drawing the knife sharply across her forearm.  She gasped as dark
blood welled up, even though she barely felt the cut.

"What should I do with the knife?" she asked, staring a little
lightheadedly at the lengthening red streak on her arm.

"Dip the tip in the blood," Razi commanded.  "Now touch it to the
wick.  Good.  Again.  No, dip it, then touch the wick again---it has
to be three separate drops.  That's right. Now, put the knife down on
the table.  If you look in my bag, you should find a roll of bandage."

Just as Erileine handed the roll of white cotton to Razi, a tiny flame
appeared on the candle wick, and a presence enter the room.  There was
no other way to describe it: Erileine *knew* another person was there.

She she looked over her shoulder at Lady Kembe's picture, the most
powerful magician in Cherne looked back at her quizzically.  "Who are
you?" she asked.  Her lips didn't move---the portrait hadn't come
alive as they sometimes did in stories---but Erileine heard her as
clearly as if she were standing a stride away.

She swallowed dryly.  "I'm Erileine, *sra*.  Erileine FIXME é Laeuc,
of Starboard Town, on Avaunt.  I'm Bookster Razi's apprentice."

Somehow, the portrait frowned without any part of it moving.  "Where
is he? Why not does he speak with myself himself?"  The candle flame
flickered in time with her words.

"He's here, *sra*." Erileine gestured, not knowing whether she could
see or not.  "He was bowshot.  Yesterday.  In Thomas's boat.  We
berthed at Tinhead an hour ago.  There were soldiers waiting for us.
I think they're going into the tunnels, but I don't know for sure."

"Hold, hold," Lady Kembe said.  "Begin you from the beginning.  My
Razi has been shot?"

The story of the day's events tumbled out in pieces.  The more
Erileine talked, the more clearly she saw Lady Kembe.  She was older
than Erileine had first thought, but gave the impression of great
strength.  Her *deel* was white instead of brown, and she had heavy
rings on all of her fingers.

By the time Erileine finished, those fingers were drumming on her
desk.  "You are certain they were truly men?" she demanded.  "Those
the soldiers whom you saw?"

"Yes, *sra*." The scent of the candle was making Erileine dizzy.

Lady Kembe frowned.  "This disquiets me.  Tell my Razi I will make
such inquiries as I may.  Tell him also that such voices as with whom
I would usually speak have fallen into quiet.  I will ask others, but
that will take some time and doing.  And should Thomas attempt any
more than to watch, my Razi is to let me know *immediately*.  That
braggart boy will peril us all if he is not soon kenneled." It didn't
sound like she would particularly mind being the one to kennel him.

"Yes, *sra*, I'll tell him." The room was swimming.  Erileine's head
snapped back.  How could she fall asleep at a time like this? "'S there
an'thing else?"

Lady Kembe's expression softened slightly.  "No.  Tell my Razi that I
shall do my usual to mend him with such as he left here.  He is not to
allow himself more injury in that time, or I shall be very cross
indeed.  Now, darken the candle, and rest.  You have done your name
credit."

"Yes, *sra*," Erileine said faintly.  She almost toppled onto the
candle as she bent over to blow it out.

Lady Kembe's presence vanished.  Erileine's knees gave way.  Her
tongue felt like a slab of raw goat, and tasted almost as rank.  "Sit,
*la*, just sit," Razi told her.  "It will pass."

Erileine slid down to the floor.  The rich, sweet smell of the candle
was too much.  It was like her seventh naming day, when she snuck
downstairs and ate both of the blackberry pies her mother had baked
for her, then threw up in the field behind Mamaere Mayeule's.  The
whole room was going cross-eyed...

"Erileine.  Erileine!" Her eyes snapped open.  Razi held out a small
red bottle.  "Here, this may help.  That's it.  That's it.  No, not
all at once, just a sip, then some more.  *La*, and I will open the
window."

Erileine did as he was told.  The lemon-mint tang of whatever was in
the bottle helped.  So did the cold night air.  She filled her lungs
again and again.  Her stomach was still queasy, and arms and legs felt
like they were made of wet rags, but at least she wasn't going to
throw up.

"Better?" Razi asked.  Erileine nodded.  "*La*, it is quite something,
isn't it? The first time Lady Kembe talked to me that way, my
kidnappers had to tie me onto my camel to stop me falling off
afterward."

"Too bad we don't have any camels," Erileine said.

"*La*, believe me, you are better off without them.  Now, give me your
arm, and tell me what she said."

Razi bandaged Erilein's cut as she recounted Lady Kembe's side of the
conversation.  He nodded when Erileine repeated Lady Kembe's comment
about the 'usual voices' having gone quiet.  "*La*, she thought that
might happen.  The gossipy little spirits who bring her news are
frightened, though they know not of what."

Erileine pulled her sleeve back down.  "Does she know what's going
on?"

"No.  She would tell us if she did.  She is not the kind to send
anyone into battle blindfolded.  *La*, don't look so worried, it is
just a figure of speech.  Now, let us see if sneaking back into bed is
as easy as sneaking out.  You need to sleep---we both of us do."

"Sure." Erileine didn't need convincing.  Her eyelids were so heavy...
"Wha' did she mean about mending you?"

Razi shrugged, seeming almost embarrassed.  "*La*, she will work a
spell to help me heal, is all."

"All the way from there? Wow."

"*La*, well, I left some things behind to make it easier.  Don't worry
about that---you should sleep."

Erileine nodded, looking again at the sketch on the wall.  It was just
ink on linen once more.  "Should I put it away?"

Razi shook his head.  "*La*, no, I will do it.  Though I'm sure we
will need it again soon."
