"He's half-empty," Nuu Ciy said matter-of-factly, washing her hands in
a basin of soapy water.  "And if it had been a thumb to the left, he'd
be compost.  As it is..."

"As it is?" the captain prompted.

His wife was a head shorter than Erileine, but carried herself as if
she was as big as the mountain.  She dried her hands on a scrap of
cotton and dropped it into a shallow copper bowl whose sides were
sticky with Razi's blood.  She sighed and started untying her apron.
"As it is, he'll live, unless he does it again."

"Thank you, love." The infirmary on the ground floor of the Hardeck
was as big as the Grand Hall.  Two dozen wooden beds lined one wall;
the other was completely taken up with shelves.  Bandages and spools
of strong cotton thread stood next to trays of scalpels and
wicked-looking bone saws.  Night had fallen, so the only light came
from pieces of dayglass set in bamboo sconces above the beds.

Nuu Ciy had stitched Razi's wound closed as carefully as Papaere Vurt
would stitch up a torn boot, and about as gently.  She had muttered
small spells the whole time, pleas for strength and wards against
infection that made her hands glisten faintly.  Erileine wondered what
she was giving up on Razi's behalf: a little more of her sense of
smell, perhaps, or her memory of the bright blue dress she had worn on
her tenth naming day.

Through it all, Thomas sat on the bed next to Razi's, watching Nuu
Ciy's work with professional curiosity.  Erileine had almost (almost)
punched him when he told Erileine that he couldn't help Razi.  "But
he's dying!" she had shouted.

"Yes, so the faster you get help, the better," he repeated for the
third time.

"But why can't *you* fix him!?" she pleaded.

"Because I like being able to open doors for myself," the magician
snapped.  "And having to return to this dreary venue once a year for
the rest of my life would be unspeakably tiresome.  Now, are you going
to do something useful, or shall we sit back and wait for those
imbecile condors?"

Erileine had gone for help.

As Nuu Ciy's assistants scrubbed streaks of blood off her arms, the
captain turned to Thomas.  "So, there was no warning at all?"

Thomas shook his head.  "None.  As I said before---twice, I
believe---we were still a gallop from town. They must have hidden
siege bows in the trees by the road." He yawned suddenly.  "Clever of
them, I must say.  I mean, they can't actually have been *expecting*
us."

The captain's scowl showed what he thought of Tinhead's inhabitants
being clever.  "And there was just the one shot?"

Thomas shrugged.  "There may have been more afterward, but I turned
tail the instant we were hit.  It's rather vexing, you know.  I put a
lot of work into that boat---it will take ages to mend her."

The guard at the door cleared his throat meaningfully.  "What?"  the
captain barked.

"Chief Steward, *sra*.  Wants to know if you'll want dinner brought
down."

"Saints.  No, I'll take it upstairs as usual.  You might as well get
back to your post.  Oh, and Eamile? No telling tales, understood?"

"Yes, *sra*." The guard saluted sharply, right fist to left breast.

The captain sighed again.  A hundred people had seen Razi carried into
the Hardeck, unconscious and dripping blood.  By now, half the town
would be saying that he had been attacked by griffins, gargoyles, or
gaunts, while the other half would be just as sure that he and Thomas
had fought a duel on board the magician's flying boat.  He'd be dead
and risen, or have vanished in a puff of smoke.

"And someone will find a way to blame the Hett," he said sourly.

"*Sra?*" Erileine said uncertainly.

"Nothing," the captain said, clapping her on the shoulder, his eyes on
Razi.

Nuu Ciy unstoppered a small black bottle and painted a few drops of
poppy tar on Razi's lips with the trimmed end of a gull's feather.
"He'll sleep until morning," she announced, re-corking the
sweet-smelling mixture.  "Now, everyone out.  No, you too, young
woman.  One of my nurses will stay with him."

Erileine was out the door and on the Hardeck's steps before she
realized that she had no idea what to do next.  Once again, she was on
her own in the biggest town on the mountain with a string of coins in
her pocket.  This time, though, the sky was dark, and her teacher was
unconscious with twenty-two fresh stitches in his side.  She supposed
she should go back to the Three Rabbits, but the thought of lying
alone in her room was unbearable.  Maybe he should go to Uncle Regi's
instead, if she could figure out how to get there.

"Well, then." Erileine turned as Thomas ambled down the steps.  "Quite
a day, wasn't it?"

"If you say so," Erileine said curtly.

Thomas smiled indulgently.  "Now, now.  There's really no need to
speak that way."

"He could have *died!*" The angry words were out of Erileine's mouth
before she knew he was going to say them.

Thomas nodded.  "Yes, he could have.  He could have died yesterday,
too, or the day before.  Would that have been my fault too?"

For a moment, all Erileine could do was gape like a fish out of water.
"You---you could have saved him if you wanted to! You could have---"
*You could have grabbed his hand,* she'd been about to say.  *All you
had to do was reach out.*

Thomas sighed theatrically.  "It escapes me, truly, why supposedly
educated people believe that magicians can just snap their fingers and
set the world right.  Every spell I might have used would have cost me
far more than I was willing to give up, especially with so much
mundane help just a few steps away.  Rushing around and saving
people---that's not really what magicians do, you know.  That kind of
thing is better left to the booksters of this world."

"Did you tell his last apprentice that too?" Erileine asked bitterly.

Thomas smiled thinly.  "No.  No, what I told *him* was that if I ever
saw him again, I'd put his eyes out with my thumbs." He nodded
farewell politely and, whistling, went on his way.

Erileine's anger dissipated as quickly as it had come, leaving her
cold and tired.  She bought a sausage on a stick and a strip of flat
bread from a stall that stayed open for militiamen on the night watch,
and chewed them slowly as she walked back to the Three Rabbits.

The old woman at the Three Rabbits had already heard about Razi, but
seemed more worried about Erileine.  "I'm fine," she reassured her.
"But I hope my maere and paere hear the story straight.  I mean, if
someone tells them it was me instead of him..."

"Well, there's nothing anyone can do about that tonight, is there?"
the old woman said soothingly.  "Now, are you sure you aren't hungry?
There's plenty of beans left in the pot."

"I'm fine, thank you.  I think I'll just go to bed."

"All right.  Oh, but wait.  I almost forgot.  Your little friend left
this for you.  He said you dropped it in the market." The old woman
took a book from the mantelpiece and handed it to her.

Erileine blinked.  It was the collection of stories she had looked at
that afternoon.  "Thank you," she said automatically.  "Was it---who
dropped it off?"

The old woman raised an eyebrow.  "You don't know?"

Erileine shrugged, feeling embarrassed.  "I can guess," she lied,
"But, you know, I'd hate to get it wrong."

The old woman's smile turned up at the corners.  "Starboard Town must
be quite the place on holidays."

Erileine blinked.  "Excuse me?"

"Well, if everyone is as popular as you and the bosun...  I'd say he
was twelve or thirteen.  Could use some new clothes and a bath, but he
had very nice eyes."

Blushing, Erileine thanked her again and climbed the stairs to her
room.  The only light came from a sliver of dayglass beside the
window.  It was cheap stuff, so orange that it was almost red, and
didn't cast nearly enough to read by, but she sat on his bed with the
book open in her lap anyway.  It had to have been the thief.  But why
would he give her a book? Unless he planned to tell the militia that
she had stolen it.  No, that didn't make any sense.  The old woman
would tell them where it had come from.

She riffled its pages, then turned it upside down and shook it.
Nothing.  Invisible ink? Magic writing that would only show up when
the moon was full, or if the reader whistled the right song?

Defeated, she wrapped the book in her spare shirt and slipped it into
her satchel, then stripped down to her underclothes and slid her
skinny legs under the the quilt.  She would take the book back
tomorrow, right after she checked on Razi.  She closed her eyes and
tried not to think of the bookster lying on the dock, bleeding.  She
had just stood there.  He had needed her help, and she had just
*stood* there.

Sleep was a long time coming.
