The mood on Forecastle's streets the next morning was stretched as
taut as a violin string.  Everyone was in a hurry, head down, face
set.  Erileine saw people measure them sidelong as they passed---a
pale red-headed man in an ever-changing coat, a tall black figure in a
dust-colored *deel*, and a round-faced brown girl trailing in their
wake---but no one smiled or said hello.

As they neared the market square, voices shouted in unison.  They
rounded the corner to discover that half the stalls had been cleared
away to make a parade ground.  "Hwah!" Forecastle's gray-haired bosun
and his three mates shouted orders, corrections, encouragement, and
abuse as a dozen squads of spearmen and archers lunged and kneeled,
drew and released.  Beneath their boots lay the outline map of Cherne
that she had heard described, but had never before seen.  White
cobblestones set among the gray showed the continent's coastline; red
ones showed the mountain's path from Mau Ngapcha to Gandan.  A
spatter-edged streak of paint showed the mountain's most recent
course.

The usual pair of guards stood outside the Hardeck's main doors.
Today, though, they wore helmets and gorgets, and gave the approaching
travelers a careful up-and-down as they climbed the stairs.
"Magister," one said to Thomas, nodding respectfully while the other
opened the door.

"Thank you," the magician said politely.  He swept inside like royalty
with Razi and Erileine in his wake.

The captain was in the Grand Hall, his hands clasped behind his back,
a frown furrowing his forehead.  He turned away from the window as
they entered.  "Bookster, magister," he nodded.  "Have you found
anything to brighten my day?"

Razi shook his head.  "*La*, no, not in your library.  But
elsewhere..."  He quickly described the men they had seen.

The captain's expression hardened as the bookster spoke.  "By all the
failed saints," he swore.  "Klaues swore this was nothing to do with
his people."

"*La*, perhaps he is as ignorant of what is being done as we were,"
Razi suggested.  "From what I am told, the tinker's assistant is new
to the mountain."

The captain scowled. "I doubt many people will think that far. Anyway,
it looks like we're headed for Tinhead after all.  Take a look." He
gestured at the window.

Erileine followed the line of the captain's pointing finger.  The
mountains in front of them were ridged and ragged like a crumpled
carpet, snow-white and pine-green.  Without warning, the scene swam
and re-formed.  She yelped and threw up her arms even as the view
steadied again.

"Oh, well done," Thomas murmured appreciatively.  "Well done."  The
panes to the left and right showed what they had a moment before, but
the one in the center had pulled the view closer.  Instead of
mountains fifty gallops away, they were looking at a neat town from
what appeared to be no more than a few hundred strides.  Its
buildings, made of gray brick and roofed with dark slate shingles,
stood in a figure eight around two squares.  Sun glistened on glass in
the buildings' windows---more glass than Erileine had ever seen---but
the only sign of life was a lone jay that fluttered away even as they
watched.

"It's beautiful work," Thomas said, ignoring the view and running a
gentle fingertip across the glass.  "Absolutely beautiful.
Korrandarrenduk?"

The captain shook his head.  "Ip of Seyferte.  About three hundred
years ago.  There used to be another one at Aft Landing, but some
Bantangui pirate smashed it to bits about a hundred years ago."

"May he be reborn to misery a thousand thousand times." Thomas spoke
the curse without rancor.  "Do you mind me asking its price?"

The captain shrugged.  "My name.  And I can't leave the mountain."

"Ah." Thomas nodded sympathetically.  "Ip was never one to use a pin
when a lance would do."

"*La*, captain, can you move the focus?" Razi interrupted.

The captain nodded.  "Yes.  But only to things that you could see that
are in view anyway."

Razi pursed his lips.  "*La*, so, where is the picture of Tinhead? The
one from the book?"

The captain jerked his thumb at the wall.  "I stuck it up there next
to the whales."

Razi blinked.  "*La*, you tore it out of the book?"

"No, of course not.  I used a razor.  Why?"

Razi stared at the captain.  "Perhaps...  perhaps in future a copy
would suffice, yes?" he said stiffly.

The captain and Thomas exchanged amused looks as Razi took the page
down from the wall.  He held it up in front of the window, glancing
back and forth between it and the scene in front of them.

"*La*, so, can you show us what's to the left, please?" he asked.  The
captain passed his hand slowly in front of the window.  The view slid
sideways, making Erileine's stomach lurch.  Pines no different from
Avaunt's, and rocks, and a fence around an empty pasture---

"Stop! There."  Razi pointed.  A tower twenty stories high stood
against the side of the mountain.

"Why in the names of the saints would anyone build something like that
in the middle of nowhere?" the captain demanded testily.

"Because you expect something to come to it?"  Erileine said.  She
blushed under the sudden weight of three pairs of adult eyes.
"Sorry," she muttered.  "I just thought..."

Thomas beamed.  "You *do* pick bright ones, don't you? One day I shall
have to ask you how you find them.  My apprentices have all been a
great disappointment."

"Hold the reins a moment," the captain interrupted.  "It must have
taken years to build that thing! Do you think someone's been planning
this for that long?"

Thomas shrugged.  "Who can say? A closer look might give us some
answers."

The captain frowned.  "I could send one of the condors."

"*La*, but how long would that take?" Razi said.  "Whereas if we left
now, we could be back in time to spoil your dinner."

"We?"  Thomas blinked theatrically.  "As in, you and me?  Razi... I
thought you said you'd see me dead before you'd set foot on the
*Presumption* again."

"That was more of a hope than a requirement," the bookster replied.

"Stow it," the captain ordered sharply.  He frowned at the view in
front of him.  If the top-most branches of the trees hadn't been
swaying gently in the afternoon breeze, Erileine could have believed
it was some strange kind of painting.  "All right.  Do you want a
couple of my men along, just in case?"

"I'm sure we'll be fine," Thomas said politely.  "If we leave now, we
ought to have enough light to find our way back." He gestured toward
the door.  "After you?"

As they turned to leave, Razi pulled a string of coins out of the
sleeve of his *deel*.  "Take these and find us a room," he ordered, as
if Erileine had done it for him a dozen times before.  "Somewhere
close by---*la*, closer than the Green Pig, if you can.  I would
prefer quiet to noisy, and small to large, and a bath above all other
things."

A few minutes later, Erileine stood alone on the Hardeck's steps.  She
hefted the string of coins.  It was more money than she had ever held
in her life.  Somewhere with a hot bath *would* be nice.  Somewhere
with a hot bath and a library would be even nicer.

Erileine didn't think of herself as shy, but he had never had to ask a
stranger for directions before.  She had always been able to follow
her father through the streets and alleys that doubled back on
themselves, met at odd angles, or, in the case of the one she was now
on, dead-ended against the front door of a bootmaker's.

Voices rose and fell inside.  "Hello?" she said uncertainly, pushing
the door open.

The two women sitting behind the long trestle table inside looked up
and said, "Clear day," in unison.  Both had their hair in braids
pulled back and tied with twists of silk.  Planks of dark brown
leather lay in neat stacks behind them, while half-finished boots lay
in pieces or stood upside down on lasts before them.  A samovar as big
as a goat's head took up one entire end of the table.  The sugary
smell coming from it made Erileine's stomach grumble.

Erileine cleared his throat.  "Clear day.  I'm, um, we're visiting.
From Starboard Town."

"With the bosun?" the woman on Erileine's left asked immediately.

The one on the right rolled her eyes.  "Shush, Gisaelle, let the girl
speak."

"Um, sort of.  He went back yesterday. I'm just, I'm supposed to find
somewhere to stay.  Do you know anywhere? Somewhere small and nearby?"

"The Sign of the Three Rabbits," the woman on the right said.  "It's
the bosun's favorite when he's here, isn't that right, Gisaelle? Very
quiet for those who don't want to be disturbed." She elbowed the other
woman in the ribs.

Gisaelle blushed.  "It's a very good inn," she said, a little weakly.

The first woman snorted.  "I'm sure.  Anyway, two up on your left to
the cordwainer's, go down the alley, left again to the stairs by the
flower seller, top of the stairs.  Not far at all, isn't that right,
Gisaelle?"

"Far enough for people who don't want other people sticking their
noses into things that are none of their business," the woman on the
left said sharply.

When they wanted a scare, Avauntois children told each other about a
house in Aft Landing (or maybe Portside, it depended who was telling
the story).  There was nothing behind its back door but empty air, and
when children were nosy, the evil magician (or Hett, or ghost) who
lived there sent them out back to fetch firewood.

Erileine felt like she had just stepped through that door.  She raised
his palms with a hasty, "Thank you, ladies, that's very helpful, much
appreciated," and fled.

A grin split her face as she walked toward the cordwainer's.  She
would *definitely* have to ask the bosun about his boots when he got
home.  Of course, the story would be better if he knew the name of the
shop...

She turned impulsively at the thought.  The small figure two dozen
strides behind her instantly turned around as well.  "Hoy!" Erileine
exclaimed.  "Hoy, you!" It was the ragtag boy who had tried to steal
the bosun's wallet.  "Stop!" But he had already disappeared into a
side alley like a rabbit going down a hole.

Erileine thrust her hand into her pocket and whooshed with relief.
The coins Razi had given her were still there.  Wasn't the boy
supposed to be in a dungeon? She hurried up the street.  As soon as
she found an inn, she would go back to the Hardeck and tell them he
had escaped.

The Sign of the Three Rabbits was as big as the Captain's House in
Starboard Town, and just as well kept.  Knee-high wooden planters
filled with red and yellow azaleas stood guard on either side of its
spotless yellow front door.  More flowers watched primly from matching
planters on the window sills.  Symmetric blue whorls were painted on
either side of the door frame, Bantangui style, representing the ears
that were supposed to listen for malicious gossip about the house's
residents.  The old woman snoring in a wicker rocking chair on the
balcony above the door made the picture complete.

Erileine yanked the braided cord that hung by the door.  A drum
thumped inside, but no one answered.  He pulled the cord again,
harder.

The snoring stopped.  "Who is it?" a voice yawned.

Erileine stepped back from the door and looked up.  The old woman was
rubbing her eyes, her dark brown face silhouetted against the sky.

"Clear day, *sra*," she said politely.  "I'm looking for a room for
the night.  The bootmakers said you might have one?"

The old woman dug the last of her nap out of the corners of her eyes.
"On your own?" she asked doubtfully.

Erileine shook her head.  "No, *sra*.  I'm Bookster Razi's apprentice.
The room's for both of us." She held up her string of coins and
jingled them.

A few minutes later, Erileine had exchanged a half-ring and sixpence
for a pair of wooden tokens that might have looked like rabbits to
whoever had carved them.  The old woman certainly knew Bosun Uyves.
Very popular, the bosun was.  Easy to see why, with shoulders like
his, and that smile, and of course everyone said he was such a good
dancer, not that she had ever had a chance herself, her dancing days
were far behind her, just as Erileine's were still in front of er.
She did dance, didn't she? With anyone in particular yet? No? Oh, that
would come, that would come, not to worry.  Why, she herself had been
fifteen the first time someone had asked her to dance.  A vagabond, he
turned out to be, not like the bosun, but of course she couldn't have
known that at the time.  Now, did she want to leave those bags with
her, or in the room?  Oh, yes, the room had a lock, of course, and not
just for when they were berthed at Normous or Mau Ngapcha, no, sad to
say, the mountain had thieves of its own, indwellers most of them, or
Hett, the saints alone knew why the captain let either onto the
mountain, not that she was questioning his judgment, of course, he was
a fine captain, though his predecessor *had* been much firmer about
such things.  That camp of theirs by the sawdust tips was as good as
being a little town of its own now, wasn't it? And that house on Squid
Street, well, it shouldn't be allowed, not that it was her place to
decide that, of course, the captain knew his business, he was a fine
man, just as Bosun Uyves was a fine, fine man, very popular, and easy
to see why, of course, with shoulders like his, and that smile...

Her words splashed over Erileine like the monsoon rains of Mau
Ngapcha.  She kept smiling and saying, "Yes, *sra*," and "Thank you,"
and turning toward the door, but the torrent of words didn't stop
until she backpedaled onto the street.

And so Erileine found herself alone in the biggest town on Avaunt with
time on her hands and money in her pocket.  Emboldened by her success
in finding the Three Rabbits, she asked a man walking by with a rack
of skewered chickens over his shoulder for directions.  Booksellers'
Cross?  Down that way was fastest.  Erileine ducked to avoid being
clouted by a dead chicken as he turned to describe the route.

Anyone watching would have thought Erileine was ambling without a care
in the world---at least, that's what she hoped.  She peered into shop
windows, stopped to study herself in the half-height mirror chained to
the wall in front of a tailor's, and doubled back on her own trail
half a dozen times.  She never looked directly at the ragged figure
trailing in her wake.  It was just like trying to round up Mamaere
Mayeule's cat: you had to get *it* to chase *you*...

But eventually her shadow disappeared.  Disappointed, she doubled back
once more, but the boy was gone.  She shrugged, trying to be
philosophical.  At least now she could actually go and look at some
books.

His father had first taken him to Booksellers' Cross on his eighth
naming day.  The booksellers had rolled their eyes at one another, all
thinking, "Here's another one," as they remembered themselves at her
age.

Novels, pamphlets, diaries... Poetry, medicine, recipes, magic, and
law... Gandan-o, Ruudian, Uwsian, Bantangui, Praczny, and languages
Erileine didn't yet recognize...  Lost among the petrified learning,
the frozen elsewheres and elsewhens, she took no more notice of time
passing than she did of her own breathing.

She leafed through every Praczny book she found, finally selecting a
tract on the rights of Gifted animals and a collection of romantic
stories full of noble knights who left their loves behind for seven
years while they quested after tin rings that held their parents'
souls, or magicians who were wrongly imprisoned for necromancy, only
to be saved (or doomed) when a king in waiting fell in love with them.
She weighed them in his hands, then put the tract back where she had
found it.  His mother and Queçenne would prefer the stories, she told
herself, not admitting to herself that she'd enjoy them too.

"Three rings," the bookseller said when Erileine asked its price.

Her jaw dropped.  "Three rings!?"

The bookseller shrugged without looking up from the water-stained
collection of fishing poems he was carefully mending.  He was as tall
as Razi, but skinny where Erileine's teacher was merely lean, and had
stupendously bad breath.  "That's cheap.  Possibly the only cheap
things left on the mountain, books.  Beans and wool, they're what's in
fashion these days." He snorted, sawing delicately at the book's
binding with a scaling knife.

Erileine sighed.  A half-ring, and he might have bought it.  But three
rings!

She scowled.  "A half-ring and eightpence."

"No." The bookseller didn't even look up.

"All right, a half and ten," Erileine offered.  "Look, the spine is
almost broken.  I'll have to stitch the pages back together in a year
or two."

The bookseller glanced at the book, then at Erileine.  "Two rings a
half and sixpence, not a fingernail less." He shrugged again.  "I
can't sell it for less than I paid, can I?"

"I suppose not," Erileine said, defeated.  She could probably find
something that se could afford, but after deciding she wanted the
stories, anything else would feel second best.  And anyway, it was
getting late.  She should get back to the Hardeck and wait for Razi.

Two new guards stood at the Hardeck's front doors.  As far as they
were concerned, young Starboard Towners belonged in Starboard Town
while all this fuss was going on.  "But I'm Bookster Razi's
apprentice," Erileine protested.  "I was getting us a room.  At the
Three Rabbits."

One of the guards raised his eyebrows at that.  The other shook his
head.  "Can't go in without an escort."

"But I'm supposed to meet him here!"

The guard shook his head again.  "Not without an escort."

"All right." Erileine thought for a moment.  "Well, if you see the
bookster, can you please tell him we're at the Sign of the Three
Rabbits?"  The guard supposed he could do that, so Erileine thanked
him and headed for Dock Street.

Forecastle's lone air dock was a weatherbeaten pine shelf, ten strides
deep and forty long, whose tree-trunk railing posts doubled as
stanchions. Tiny compared to the four-story monsters at Ruuda-in-Ruuda
or Yadanapore, it was adequate for the clouds, magic carpets, and more
unusual visitors the mountain received between its northern and
southern berths.

A small counterbalanced crane was the dock's only resident when
Erileine reached it.  The shadows were lengthening, and the cold air
felt damp.  She shivered and hunched her shoulders so that she could
bury her chin in the collar of her coat.

The land below was beautiful.  Orange sunset reflected off ponds and
streams nestled in countless little valleys, the snow on the peaks of
the mountains around Avaunt, and the clouds grazing near the horizon.
It could have been the approach to Gandan Berth, except there wasn't a
road or a building in sight.  Traders from all over the Nine Marches
would be on their way to meet Avaunt at that centuries-old rendezvous.
How many of them already knew that the mountain wasn't going to be
there?

There! That dot.  She brought her hand up to shield her eyes.  It had
to be Thomas's flying boat, the *Presumption*.  She was coming in
fast, Erileine realized---very fast.

She waved.  A tiny arm wave back.  She dragged a couple of bumpers
over to the dock's edge, looped their nooses around stayposts, and
kicked them under the railing so that they dangled over the side.

The *Presumption* was only fifty strides away when Erileine realized
that something was sticking out of her hull.  Her belly went cold.  It
was an arrow, but as thick around as her arm.  Splinters starred the
planks around its puncture like a frozen shout of pain.

Thomas steered the *Presumption* in close, yelling, "Clear away!"
Erileine scrambled back.  As the flying boat thudded against the
bumpers, he threw an end of rope at Erileine.  "Tie her fast!" he
ordered.  "Fates and Furies, what a mess!"

"Where's Razi?" Erileine asked as she made a clumsy knot.

Thomas slipped around the mast to the boat's bow and jumped onto the
dock with another length of line in his hand, heedless of the
half-gallop of empty air below him.  "It's not that I think it would
be much of a loss," he said as he tied the boat fast.  "But *she*
would never believe that I didn't have a hand in it.  Here, get that
gangplank over here." He hopped back into the boat.

"But where's Razi?" Erileine repeated.  Panic was like cold soup in
her throat.

Thomas crouched down.  "Come on," he grunted, "Stop messing up my
boat." He straightened, his right arm around Razi's back, his left
holding the bookster's arm across his shoulders.

"*La*, so, put down a rug next time," Razi mumbled.  His *deel* was
slick red with blood.  More was leaking through the fingers he had
pressed against his side.

He and Thomas stumbled down the gangplank like drunkards.  As they
reached the dock, the bookster tripped over his own unsteady feet and
collapsed.
