The old woman shook her awake.  "What? What?" Erileine demanded
muzzily.  The little piece of dayglass had long since gone dull, but
the old woman had a small brass lantern.  Lighting her face from
below, it made her look like a ghost out of a Bantangui puppet play.
"I think we're berthing!"  she said fearfully.  "Can't you hear it?"

"What?" The words made no sense to Erileine.  How could they be
berthing?  But suddenly the crackling sound she could hear wasn't a
fire in the hearth downstairs but a forest being crushed to kindling
by the mountain's underside.  A faint shudder ran through the house.
A moment later, thunder rumbled faintly in the distance.  Erileine
swallowed.  Had they just knocked the peak off one of the mountains
below?

She flung off her quilt and reached for her clothes.  "It woke me up,"
the old woman said, hugging herself inside the oversized ankle-length
coat that she was wearing over her thick white nightdress.  "I went
downstairs to see if it was someone trying to jemmy the door, but
there was no one there, and then everything started shaking.  What's
happening?"

*Why are you asking me?* Erileine thought resentfully, even though she
knew it was because she had no one else to ask.  "I don't know," she
said.  He pulled her right foot out of her left boot and took a deep
breath.  "Do you have someone you can be with?  Just in case?"

"There's my son-by-marriage," she said uncertainly.  "He's remarried
now, but he's just two streets away.  But he hates fuss---I don't want
to be a fuss."

Erileine almost laughed.  She was pretty sure this wouldn't be counted
as fussing.  "I'm sure he won't mind," she said, knotting her laces
and grabbing her satchel.  "But I have to get to the Hardeck."

She ran through the streets of Forecastle like a rabbit with a lynx on
its tail.  The streets seemed even more tangled in the dark.  Twice
she thought she had lost her way, but each time she came around a
corner and found herself exactly where she should have been.

Around her, guards with militia helmets in one hand and spears or bows
in the other hurried to their rallying stations.  People with coats or
blankets thrown over their nightclothes stood in doorways or looked
out of thrown-open shutters, yelling questions at each other, at
Erileine, at the mountain itself.

One last corner, and she was in the market square.  It was chaos.
Someone yelled, "Caeline!  Caeline!" over and over, looking for their
squad or perhaps a lost cat.  "Watch where you swing that!" a man in
striped summer trousers and heavy boots snarled as a clumsy
militiaman's spear nearly took his ear off.

"If you've got your gear, find the rest of your squad and form up!" a
bosun's mate bellowed.  "If you don't, then get it!  Hey, where do you
think you're going?"

"I'm the bookster's apprentice," Erileine panted.  "He's in the
infirmary.  I'm supposed to be with him." She started up the steps.

The bosun's mate blocked her.  "Get off with you."

A guardsman coming up the stairs behind Erileine caught her.  "Go easy
there," he cautioned the shover.  "We're not at war yet." He looked at
Erileine.  "I know you.  You were with what's his name, the fellow on
the boat."

Erileine nodded vigorously.  "In the infirmary.  I'm supposed to be
with him now."

The guardsman let go of her arm.  "Well then, get in there." He pushed
Erileine up the stairs, past the glowering mate.

Erileine raced to the infirmary, dodging clerks, mates, and household
staff as they all tried to organize one another.  She stopped at the
infirmary door to catch her breath, then pushed it open as gently as
she could.  "Bookster?" she said softly.

Razi lay motionless in bed, looking exactly as he had when Erileine
last saw him.  For a moment Erileine thought he was dead, that the
spells the captain's wife had used hadn't been enough, but then Razi's
fingers twitched.

"Bookster!" she whispered loudly.  "Are you awake?"

The bookster's eyes fluttered.  "Eimin?"

"Bookster?"

"*La*, Erileine..." Razi struggled to sit up, then let his head fall
back on his pillow.  "When is?"

"It's morning.  Almost, anyway.  You're in the infirmary, in the
Hardeck.  Bookster, we're berthing!"

The bookster closed his eyes again.  "And the sea shall give me over
to the land, constant and weighty," he whispered.

"Bookster, are you all right?" Erileine sat on the edge of her
teacher's sick bed, swallowing back the panic rising in her throat.
She hadn't thought any further than finding Razi.  He *had* to know
what to do.

The dark man chuckled weakly.  "*La*, I do not think that is the
phrase I would use.  Have you water?"

There was, a pitcher on the table where Nuu Ciy's bowl had been.
Erileine poured some into a heavy brown pottery mug and held it up
gingerly.

Razi sipped and made a face. "There's poppy in this."

Erileine took it from him uncertainly.  "The captain's wife gave you
some last night.  Do you remember what happened?"

Razi sighed raggedly.  "Someone shot us.  Me.  From the trees." He
slid one hand down to his side under the quilt and winced.  "*La*...
She will be disappointed in me, you know.  I told her, yes, I promise,
I can do a little traveling without gathering any new scars." He tried
to chuckle.

The room trembled slightly.  Erileine clutched the bedframe wide-eyed.
"What was that?" Razi said, some of his usual sharpness in his voice.

"I think it was another mountaintop."

"Another...? *Ye mashe aue*, we're berthing?" At Erileine's nod the
bookster tried once more to sit up.  Erileine rushed forward to help
him, but the bookster fell back again before he could.

"Go," Razi said.  "*La*, go, the magic window.  Find news.  I will
dress."

Erileine took the stairs to the Grand Hall three at a time.  They
shuddered beneath her.  A painting fell from the wall, missing her by
a handspan.  She tripped at the top, banging her knee painfully
against the floor, but hobbled on.

The Grand Hall was as full as the market square.  He squeezed between
two guards, ducked under a clerk's elbow, and found herself just
inches from the magic window.

"Brace yourselves," the captain barked.  The room shook as Avaunt
clipped another peak.  For a moment Erileine thought the red thread
running through the trees below them was lava, but it was just the
rising sun reflecting off a stream.

The scene below was like something out of the Pilots' war.  This
wasn't Gandan Berth or the jungle at Mau Ngapcha.  Avaunt hadn't
trimmed these trees every sixteen months for centuries.  These were
full grown, tall and proud, but still they bent under the force of the
mountain's bow wave just before being snapped in half.

A flock of frightened ducks burst upward from a pond as its surface
trembled.  The winged pigs that had been rooting in the muck at the
pond's edge took flight a moment later, and then the pond was gone.
Deer and gaur fled in panic side by side with chameleon bears, the
Gifted among them shouting panicked orders.  Nests and burrows were
crushed as Avaunt ground the earth beneath it.

Suddenly there was silence, as the mountain cleared a ridge and the
land momentarily dropped away beneath them.  "Look!" half a dozen
voices shouted needlessly.  There, nestled in a bowl-shaped valley,
lay Tinhead, its neat streets and tidy houses peaceful in the
dawnlight.

The captain swept his hand across the window.  The scene shimmered and
re-formed.  They were close enough now that they almost didn't need
magic to see, Erileine thought dazedly.  Another few moment and they
could have seen the soldiers with their own eyes.

And soldiers they clearly were, on the road that wound up the steep
hills standing guard behind the town, real soldiers with polished
steel helmets on their heads, heavy packs on their backs, and swords
at their sides.  Some had their shoulders against the rear ends of
carts, while others bawled silently at heavy-laden mules, but most
just marched.

The captain passed his hand over the window again.  There were more
carts further up the mountain, heavier ones, with four wheels instead
of two, piled high with furniture, chickens in coops, children, a very
pregnant woman, an elderly couple dressed in the same gray wool as
everyone else.  As the image swept by, Erileine saw one boy, as
pale-skinned as a Ruudian, jump up and point toward town.  The old man
sitting beside him on the cart's plank seat turned to look back at the
houses the mountain was about to crush.  *I hope you're as frightened
as we are,* Erileine thought grimly.

"Come on, where is it?" the captain growled.  Another pass, another
scene.  The gray tower they had seen the day before was now an
enormous prow of stone, twenty stories high.  The road from town
zigzagged beside it.  Three arched openings, each two stories tall and
broad enough to swallow a cart, broke its front face.  Heavy timbers
lay stacked in piles by each one.

The room rumbled again.  This time, the rumbling didn't stop.  The
mountain wasn't just clipping the tops of the hills any longer.  It
was down, grinding implacably toward Tinhead.

Without warning a house collapsed.  One wall of another gave way as
the town's two cobblestoned squares rippled like blankets being
shaken.

"Bosun!" the captain barked.  "Bosun!  Get the birds out!  And send
Jack, too.  Tell them we've berthed at Tinhead, and need help.  Tell
them!"

"Yes *sra*!" the bosun snapped, saluting.  "Tell who, *sra*?"

"Everyone! Saints in dark places, it doesn't matter, just *send
them!*"

The bosun saluted, staggering and nearly falling as the floor shook
beneath him.  All around Erileine, people yelled at each other to stop
yelling, to make way, to stand back from the window in case it
shattered, it would be a hailstorm of knives if it did, saints, why
was this happening? Why was this happening?

Sunlight glinted off the helmets of the soldiers waiting for them.
The tower wouldn't reach as high as Forecastle, Erileine realized.
Not even close.  When the mountain berthed, the openings would be face
to face with sheer cliffs.  Unless---

She squirmed around a shaven-headed clerk and tugged on the captain's
sleeve.  "*Sra*! *Sra*!" she blurted.  "The tunnels!"

"What?" The captain looked down at her.  "What are you doing here?
Where's the bookster?"

"The tunnels!" Erileine shouted.  "That's what the tower is for.
They're going to go into the tunnels!"

The captain's gaze snapped back to the window.  "Bosun!" he bellowed.
"Where is the damned weeping bosun?" He grabbed a clerk's arm.  "Go
and find him!"

Erileine turned back to the window, clutching her satchel to her
chest.  Ten heartbeats, five...  The town disappeared below the
window's lower edge.  Erileine imagined he felt an especially hard
bump as Avaunt ground Tinhead into gravel.

Suddenly the mountain slowed.  Erileine was thrown forward against the
window, along with everyone else in the room.  Miraculously, it held.
She stood up, her face pressed against the glass.  The mountain had
stopped.  They had berthed.
