Sunshine meant it was morning. Morning meant Piaerre had to get out of
bed. He rubbed the grit from his eyes and rolled over, luxuriating in a
last few moments of warmth.

The gumminess in his mouth told him he had read past midnight once
again. The book responsible sat on the stool beside his low-framed bed;
the thumb-sized piece of dayglass that had been his nightlight when he
was little lay on top of it, still glowing faintly with the remains of
the previous day's sunlight.

He yawned enormously and sat up, wrapping the quilt around his
shoulders. Vaszlav would arrive soon, if he wasn't already in his usual
spot outside Mamaere Mayeule's. Piaerre groped under the quilt for his
pants and shirt and slipped them on, then slipped the book he'd borrowed
on the peddler's previous visit into his satchel and went downstairs as
quietly as he could.

"Morning," his father Laeuc said.

"Morning," Piaerre said, yawning again. His father had already been up
for an hour, carving fine curlicue details on the shaft of a bamboo
flute.

"Going up to see Vaszlav?"

"Mm." Piaerre eyed the heel of potato bread that lay forgotten on a
plate at his father's elbow. "Are you going to eat that?"

"No, go ahead." Laeuc scored a quarter circle in the flute, then held it
up and squinted at it critically. "Don't forget you have to finish the
fence today."

"I won't." Slipping the bread into his pocket, Piaerre headed out the
front door.

He stood there blinking for a moment in the sharp light of the mountain
morning. It was earlier than he'd thought---Slip Street was almost empty.
He was tempted to go back to bed, or to sit and watch his father carve,
but then he heard a rooster crow from Armaend and Donaien's yard.
Suddenly aware that he would be spending yet another afternoon indoors,
he took a deep breath. Wood smoke, the tang of pine, and a hint of
spring...

Slip Street ran the length of Starboard Town, as crooked as a dropped
piece of string. It was paved from top to bottom with rounded gray
cobblestones, each as large as Piaerre's two hands put together. Weeding
them was the bosun's favorite punishments for minor offenses. Piaerre
had pulled up more burlicks and snowdelions than most of Starboard
Town's children, usually while muttering, "But I didn't mean to," under
his breath.

Sturdy wooden railings stood guard at the street's sharp bends to catch
runaway handcarts. A pulley post stood at the top of each straight
stretch, for those times when someone needed to haul a load of firewood
or a new couch up the mountain.

The houses crowded together on either side of the street had steep
roofs, for the snows of northern winters, and large shuttered windows,
to let in the breeze during the hot southern summers. Their whitewashed
walls were spackled with brightly-painted doors, each unique: orange and
gray, blue and red, a diamond pattern of black on gold. A man-tall door
soldier made of wood and straw stood guard beside each, each in a
carefully-mended uniform whose colors matched those of the door. Every
storyteller on the mountain had a different explanation for the custom;
all anyone really knew was that they made them because their
grandparents' grandparents had.

Above the narrow street flew the town's kites, each tethered to a
chimney. The townspeople launched them when the mountain left Mau
Ngapcha, with wishes written on their bamboo cross-struts. A few had
already fallen, or been blown away by storms, but most still dipped and
swayed in the steady breeze of the mountain's northward journey.

Piaerre touched two fingers to his lips and pointed them at the blue,
orange, and yellow paper diamond holding station downwind from his
chimney. "Next year in Ensworth," he whispered. Next year in the
greatest school in the world, surrounded by books and scholars, a place
where no one thought you were strange if you knew what "loquacious"
meant...

A cream-and-chocolate goat bleated at Piaerre from a nearby rooftop,
then lowered its head to nibble the moss between its feet. Two startled
irvings fluttered away from it like leaves in a sudden hurricane,
returning a heartbeat later to peck at the goat's leavings. Hitching his
satchel's strap higher on his shoulder, Piaerre ambled up the street
toward Mamaere Mayeule's.

Vaszlav was just starting to set up when Piaerre arrived. "Clear day,
young *sra*," the old Hett tinker puffed, slipping his heavy pack off
his shoulders and touching his hairline respectfully.

"'Day, Vaszlav," Piaerre replied. "Did you find the other Farberre
book?"

"Ah, that..." Vaszlav raised and lowered his shoulders in an apologetic
shrug. "I found it, but the fellow said it wasn't for loan. Offered him
half a quarter-ring, like you said, and promised he'd get the full worth
of it if there was so much as a smudge on the back page, but he said it
was the only copy he had."

"Oh." Downcast, but also somewhat relieved that he wouldn't have to
spend a week's wages on something he would probably read in a single
evening, Piaerre watched as the old man took apart his pack's bamboo
frame with a speed born of long practice.

He turned at the sound of footsteps on the cobblestones to find a second
Hett standing behind him. "Clear day," Piaerre said politely.

The Hett nodded. "And to you." He was younger than Vaszlav---perhaps in
his twenties, or early thirties. Where the older Hett was wiry, the
newcomer looked as sturdy as a cart ox, with the top two buttons of his
shirt undone, and a sleeveless vest over top of it instead of the full
coat that Vaszlav wore no matter what weather the mountain was flying
through. His sandy hair and gray-blue eyes were as unremarkable as his
homespun clothes, but there was a stillness about him that unsettled
Piaerre.

"Ah." Vaszlav cleared his throat. "This is Jaromir, my new apprentice.
And this *sra* is Piaerre Elaiene é Laeuc, the most voracious reader on
Avaunt."

The Hett nodded. It was definitely a nod, not Vaszlav's deferential dip
of the head. "Shall I set up here?" he asked the older Hett.

"As you like," Vaszlav grunted. He handed his apprentice two pieces of
bamboo. "Here. Idiot things must have warped with the wet. See if you
can sort them out."

A small knot of people gathered while the two Hett put Vaszlav's stall
together and set out his wares, each explaining to the next who Jaromir
was. Bored, Piaerre counted the cobblestones beneath his feet. Two,
four, six... eighteen, twenty---Slip Street was twenty cobblestones wide. He
frowned, wondering suddenly how many there were on the whole street. His
papaere or the bookster would have helped him figure it out. Not the
townspeople around him, though---they would just roll their eyes and trade
amused looks with each other.

Or worse. His stomach sank as he saw Fraederiq and Niquolas coming
toward him. They had been friends of a sort when they were younger, but
then Fraederiq's mother had run off, intoxicated (some said) by the
whispered poetry of a Bantangui cinnamon merchant, and weary of her
husband's endless thirst for argument. Now sixteen, Fraederiq hadn't
just grown taller and stronger. He'd grown angry, too, angry at the
whole world. As always, Niquolas had followed suit, rolling up his
sleeves the way Fraederiq did, throwing stones when Fraederiq threw
them, and sneering at whatever stirred the older boy's displeasure that
day.

As the only other boy their age in Starboard Town, and with a head full
of odd facts, Piaerre was resigned to being their favorite target.
Lately, though, it had almost seemed as if Fraederiq was trying to be
nice to him. That worried Piaerre more than the surreptitious trippings
and knucklings he'd grown used to. He sidled behind Armaend and Donaien,
who were lost in one of their interminable arguments about cooking, but
it was too late.

"Day." Fraederiq's greeting was just a grunt.

"Day." Piaerre stuck his hands in his pockets. The less he said...

Fraederiq jerked his chin at Vaszlav's stall. "Anything better than the
usual junk this time?"

*How should I know?* Piaerre thought. *I didn't set it up.* He shrugged.
"I dunno."

Fraederiq's eyes narrowed. "Who's he?" he asked, pointing.

"Vaszlav's apprentice."

"Huh. Another newcomer. My paere says there's too many new Hett on the
mountain."

Piaerre shrugged again. Fraederiq's father, Gaeston, said many things,
few of them kind.

He was saved from having to think of another noncommittal answer by the
ringing of Vaszlav's chime. "Clear day, good morning, *mingala ba*," he
said, as he always did. "Please, good *sra*, how many I help you today?"

Piaerre cast a quick eye over the odds and ends on display. There was
nothing he hadn't seen before. As he turned to go, Fraederiq caught his
arm. He stiffened, waiting for a knuckle-twist in his ribs. Instead,
Fraederiq nodded brusquely at Vaszlav's shelves. "What do you think of
that barrette?" he asked.

"What?"

"That barrette," Fraederiq repeated impatiently. "Think it's any good?
My paere says a lot of what he sells is junk."

Bemused, Piaerre looked at the little hair clip. It didn't look like
much of anything to him, just two fingers of polished wood held together
by a bent tin spring. "Looks all right to me," he said.

"I think it's junk," Niquolas sneered.

Fraederiq silenced him with a look. "You think someone like Chaentelle
would like it?"

Piaerre blinked. "Um... I don't know," he said weakly.

Fraederiq scowled. "Come on. You've got a sister, you ought to know."

Piaerre shrugged helplessly. Yes, he had a sister, but sharing a house
with Queçenne didn't mean he knew how she *thought*, much less what her
best friend Chaentelle would and wouldn't like. "I don't know," he
repeated. "Why don't you ask her?" *Or jump off the mountain,* he added
to himself jealously. Chaentelle probably hadn't said ten words to
Piaerre since the mountain left Mau Ngapcha, but that didn't mean he
hadn't been paying attention to her. Especially on laundry days, when
steam made the old cotton shift of her mother's that she worked in cling
to her in ways that Piaerre found increasingly disturbing...

"Pfah. You're useless." Fraederiq let go of his arm and stepped around
Armaend and Donaien, who were still arguing about the best way to chop
onions when making curry. "How much is that?" he asked Vaszlav, pointing
at the barrette.

"This?" Vaszlav picked it up and handed it to Fraederiq. "It's quite the
pretty, isn't it? Thindi, not Bantangui---on my blood, that's real
mahogany. I could let you have it for, mm, three quarter rings and two
pence."

"What? For this trash?" Fraederiq scowled. "It's not worth half that.
Here." He pulled a string of coins out of his pocket, untied it, and
held out a pair of quarter-ring coins. "I'll give you half a ring for
it, how's that?"

Vaszlav spread his hands helplessly. "I am sorry, *sra*, but I cannot. I
paid three quarter rings for it myself, and---"

"What about goods in trade?" Niquolas interrupted. He elbowed Fraederiq.
"We've been doing some carving, haven't we? We figure they'll fetch half
a ring each. Give you three now, that's..." He paused, his fingers moving
against his trouser leg.

"A ring and a half," Piaerre supplied helpfully, raising his hands a
heartbeat later to fend off a double glare from the other two boys.

As Vaszlav started to reply, Jaromir stilled him with a hand on his arm.
"What kind of carvings these are?" he asked.

Niquolas glanced around. "Heads," he said conspiratorially. "For door
soldiers. We're making them out of coconut shells. They're really
scary---still have all the hair on and everything. People are going to pay
a fortune for them, you'll see."

"That's...interesting," Vaszlav said diplomatically. "Perhaps we could
take a look at some?"

Jaromir nodded, his eyes locked with Fraederiq's. "Or perhaps it would
be simpler to agree a price, and have the *sra* repay us from their
first sales? Just in case there is not so much demand as expected?"

"Hells, keep the damned thing." Fraederiq tossed the barrette at
Vaszlav. As quick as a cobra, Jaromir snatched it out of the air.
Wordlessly, he put it back in its place on the stall, then crossed his
arms once again.

Piaerre caught his breath. Around him, conversation stilled. What
Fraederiq had done had been rude, but what Jaromir had done had been a
challenge, and Hett didn't challenge Avauntois, not if they knew what
was good for them.

He glanced at Fraederiq, expecting to see the steely-eyed stare he had
been on the receiving end of so many times himself. Instead, the corner
of Fraederiq's mouth was twisted up. "Nice catch," he said. Without
another word he turned and walked away, whistling.

Piaerre's heart sank. He knew that whistle. It meant that Fraederiq had
a plan, one that involved somebody getting hurt.

* * *

Piaerre spent the rest of the morning mending the bamboo splint fence
that kept the rabbits out of his family's vegetable garden, the
morning's exchange replaying in his mind.  Whatever Fraederiq
had in mind, it had something to do with Vaszlav and Jaromir.

The Hett peddler's chimes sounded just before noon to signal that his
visit was over. On impulse, Piaerre hung the hammer on the fence and
squeezed into the narrow gap between his house and the one next to it.

The sweat on Piaerre's face and arms chilled instantly in the cool
shadows. He paused a moment to let his eyes adjust, then inched toward
Slip Street with one hand on the wall beside him. If he stopped just
*here*, he could see the door of Fraederiq's house, while still being
hidden himself.

Vaszlav and Jaromir trudged past with their packs on their backs. A
heartbeat later, the door Piaerre had been watching opened, and
Fraederiq stepped onto the street. After glancing both ways, he set
off after the two Hett.

"Great," Piaerre muttered. Now what was he going to do? Tell the bosun
that he didn't like the look on Fraederiq's face three hours ago?
Wishing he could whisper in someone's ear from halfway across the
world like a magician in a story, he set off after Fraederiq.

At the top of Slip Street, the Hett turned right onto Forecastle Road.
Fifty strides behind them, Fraederiq hopped the fence into Papaere
Badette's bedraggled front garden. Piaerre's heart sank. That was the
shortcut to the upper goast pasture---Fraederiq was definitely trying to
catch up with the Hett, out of sight of the rest of the town.

"Afternoon, young bookster. Shouldn't you be up with your books?" The
booming voice made Piaerre jump guiltily.

"Afternoon, bosun." He touched his fingers to his hairline in a hurried
salute. Bosun Uyves returned it with his customary nod. "I'm, um, I'm
mending the fence."

The bosun raised his eyebrows. "Really? Looked to me like you were
standing in the middle of the street."

"Yes, bosun." Piaerre swallowed. "It's just..." *Fraederiq will kill me,*
Piaerre thought bleakly. "It's just, I think there's a problem."

If Piaerre hadn't sounded so miserable, the bosun wouldn't have believed
him. After all, this was the boy who once claimed that he'd been
kidnapped by a pack of banana trolls. But when Piaerre mentioned Jaromir
catching the thrown barrette, the bosun nodded. "Heard about that," he
grunted. "Damn cheeky of him."

"Yes, *sra*," Piaerre said, not sure whether the bosun was referring to
Fraederiq or Jaromir. He finished his story quickly.

Bosun Uyves sucked on his front teeth for a moment. "Up to the goat
pasture, eh? All right. Let's go see what's happening."

"But---"

The bosun raised a finger. Just one, but it was enough. Piaerre closed
his mouth with a snap. How did he get himself into these things?

There was an even shorter shortcut to the pasture, one that involved
scrambling up ten strides of near-vertical rock. Once at the top, the
bosun reached down, grabbed Piaerre's wrist, and pulled him up like a
sack of beans. He tapped his finger to his lips, then slipped into the
trees. With a sigh, Piaerre followed.

The dense carpet of old needles underfoot muffled their steps. Suddenly
Piaerre heard voices ahead---Vaszlav's, pleading, then Fraederiq's.
"Actually, I'm saving you money," he said. "I mean, the fine would be
what, two crowns? Maybe three? Hells, the bosun might even shackle you
for a week. Giving me that piece of trash seems cheap by comparison,
doesn't it?"

Piaerre and the bosun were close enough to hear Vaszlav clear his
throat. "If you put it that way..."

"No," Jaromir said firmly.

Piaerre gingerly moved a branch out of his way so that he could see.
Fraederiq was standing in the middle of the road with his back to the
bushes Piaerre and the bosun were hiding behind. The Hett were facing
him, their oversized packs on their shoulders. A frightened smile was
frozen on Vaszlav's face, but Jaromir's arms were crossed, and his
expression stony.

Fraederiq tsk'd. "Well then, I suppose there's nothing I can do except
go and tell the bosun."

"Tell me what?" Uyves asked, stepping onto the road. As Fraederiq
whirled around, Piaerre saw Jaromir flick his hand to toss something
into the bushes beside him.

"Clear day, bosun," Vaszlav said nervously. "We, um, we were just---"

"Tell me what?" the bosun repeated. There was no mistaking the threat in
his voice this time.

Fraederiq jerked his thumb over his shoulder at Jaromir. "He's wearing a
homestone. I saw it when they were in town."

"Did you now?" Uyves' eyes never left Fraederiq's face. "Funny you
didn't mention it then."

Fraederiq shrugged. "I just wanted to be sure."

The bosun's slap sounded like a stick being broken. Grabbing Fraederiq's
collar with his other hand, Uyves pulled him in close. "Now be sure of
this," he growled. "Taking fines is the captain's business, and no one
else's. I ever catch you doing it under your own sail, *you* will be
chopping wood until your hands bleed. Understood?"

"Understood," Fraederiq said sullenly, touching his finger to his
hairline with a not-quite-challenging carelessness.

The bosun pushed him away. "Good. Now be off with you."

"Yes, *sra*." Fraederiq saluted again. As he turned to walk away, he
shot Piaerre a look that was as cold as a dead snake's heart.

"So," the bosun said to the Hett. "What's this about a homestone?"

Jaromir shrugged without uncrossing his arms. "I am not wearing one,
*sra*." His accent was as sharp as the tang of pine sap in apple cider.

"Mm hm." The bosun beckoned him forward. "Open your shirt."

Wordlessly, the Hett undid his vest, then his shirt, and held them open.
Other than a healthy crop of chest hair, there was nothing to see.

"So where is it?" the bosun asked.

Jaromir lowered his arms and began buttoning his shirt.

"I said, where is it?" the bosun repeated sharply.

Vaszlav wrung his hands. "*Sra*, if my apprentice---"

"Quiet, old man. I'm not talking to you." The bosun cracked a knuckle.
"Hells. All right, you're not wearing one, but I don't think the boy
would have made it up out of nothing. Half a crown, or ten days, take
your pick."

Vaszlav opened his mouth to protest, but Jaromir cut him off. "As you
say, bosun. May I pay in parts?"

"Just as long as I have it before we berth," Uyves replied.

The Hett dipped his head. "As you say."

Uyves waited a heartbeak for the '*sra*' that should have followed. When
it didn't, he glanced at Vaszlav. "Pretty sure of himself, isn't he?"

The older Hett smiled nervously in apology. "He is still new to the
mountain, *sra*. He means no offense."

"Mm. Well." Uyves clapped Piaerre on the shoulder. "Anyway, good work
letting me know, lad."

"You're welcome," Piaerre mumbled. He could already feel Fraederiq's
hands around his throat...

With a final nod to the Hett, Uyves turned and began walking back along
the road to Starboard Town. As soon as he was out of earshot, Vaszlav
rounded on Jaromir angrily. What kind of idiot was he? The barrette was
nothing compared to the townspeople's goodwill, never mind the bosun's.
Had he forgotten who was the apprentice, and who was the master?

Jaromir just nodded, saying, "Yes *sra*, no *sra*," at regular
intervals. As soon as Vaszlav paused for breath, he said, "Excuse me,
*sra*," and bent over to fish his homestone out of the bushes where he'd
thrown it.

"Wonderful," Vaszlav said tiredly. "Perhaps you could have waited until
the young *sra* was not here?"

Jaromir glanced at Piaerre as he hung the homestone around his neck. It
was a flat lozenge of polished granite, half again as tall as it was
wide, with a hole drilled near the top for a cord. Many of the Hett who
had come to the mountain the past few years wore them. For luck, for
good health, because it had been their grandmother's, because all the
other Hett were doing it---there were as many explanations as there were
stones, and as many complaints about the practice as there were
Avauntois who would rather not have any Hett on the mountain at all.

As a sop to the more outspoken among them, the captain had ordered a
handful of homestones tested for magic. When none was found, he banned
them anyway, ordering a fine for a first offense, and expulsion from the
mountain for a second. *And here I am looking at one*, Piaerre thought.
He should have stuck to mending the fence.

"Don't worry," he said aloud to Vaszlav. "I won't say anything."

"Thank you, young *sra*," the Hett replied, ducking his head. "Now, if
you will excuse us? We will be two days to Forecastle with these packs."

"Sure. See you in two weeks." He raised a hand in farewell and turned
back toward Starboard Town.

Piaerre hurried along the path, suddenly aware that he was going to be
late for his lesson. He jumped as a macaw squawked at him from a branch
overhead, instantly angry at the way it made his heart pound. Stooping,
he picked up a stone and threw it at the brightly colored bird. "Go
home," he said loudly. The macaw squawked again and flapped away,
wondering in its little bird mind why the trees smelled so wrong, and
why the nights were so cold. A few jungle creatures were always marooned
when the mountain left Mau Ngapcha. Sometimes the townspeople caught
them and sold them as pets or delicacies at Normous Berth. More often,
though, they starved, or froze to death in the next northern winter.

Piaerre heaved a sigh of relief when he reached Slip Street without
being ambushed. It was almost noon; most people were stringing beans and
weeding potatoes in the terraced fields on either side of town. He waved
hello to the few who weren't, but didn't stop to chat.

The Captain's House watched over Starboard Town from the top of Slip
Street like a stern old shepherd watching her flock. The old captain had
still been living there when Piaerre was born. After his death, it had
been empty between the new captain's annual visits, until Razi had
arrived to catalog the eclectic collection of old books and yellowing
papers that filled its lower floor.

That morning, the walled garden in front of the house was a riot of
purple and orange flowers. Bees buzzed back and forth among them in busy
ecstasy. Piaerre paused at its front gate---the only iron gate in
Starboard Town---to catch his breath. As he reached for the latch, a meaty
fist struck the side of his head.

He yelped, staggering under the blow. Strong hands grabbed his jacket
and pulled him into the shadowed alley next to the garden wall.

Piaerre oophed as Fraederiq slammed him against the stone wall. "You
little slug," he hissed, his face so close that Piaerre could feel the
warmth of his breath. "Who the hells do you think you are? Eh? You think
you're better than the rest of us because of all that cake you read?"

"Let go of me!" Piaerre struggled helplessly. Fraederiq jerked Piaerre
toward him and slammed him back into the wall.

"Didn't anyone ever tell you to mind your own business?" Fraederiq
twisted Piaerre's collar tight with his left hand and punched him in the
ribs with his right. "Eh? Didn't anyone... ever... tell you... not... to stick...
your nose... where it doesn... belong?" Fresh blows punctuated the sentence.

"Let me go! Let me go or I'll tell!" Piaerre threw a desperate punch of
his own. He was as surprised as Fraederiq when it grazed the older boy's
cheek.

Fraederiq caught Piaerre's wrist and drove Piaerre's hand into his own
face. "Ow! Oh, stop, Piaerre! Stop, please, you'll hurt yourself!" Again
and again Fraederiq punched Piaerre in the face with his own fist. Hot
tears stung Piaerre's eyes. He opened his mouth to yell for help.

And at that moment, without warning, the mountain lurched beneath them.
