The early morning sun made the cobblestones gleam. Piaerre said hello to
people on his way down the street, and waved to Jaecque, who had thrown
open his bakery's shutters, but was too engrossed in the morning's
baking to wave back. One of his cats mewled at Piaerre, darting away
when he bent over to pet it. Another paused, its paw upraised, to watch
Piaerre pass by, then returned to its grooming.

Slip Street ran aground in a tangle of weeds and saplings sixty strides
further on. From there, a narrow path snaked through the corkscrew pine
forest between to the stairs that led to Piaerre's grandfather's house.
Steep shadows lay between the trees; here and there, tiny spiderwebs
glistened with dew, while overhead, a sickle-wing bat chittered
nervously.

The path ended at the edge of a near-cliff that fell away like a stone
waterfall. A man-tall bamboo crane waited there patiently, its rope
lying oiled and coiled in a plank box. As always, Piaerre took a firm
grip on one of the crane's legs and leaned out to look down, his pulse
thumping in his ears.

Lurid green creepers still covered the mountain's broad flanks below
him, though the riotous pink flowers that had bloomed on them after the
mountain's brief stay in Mau Ngapcha had fallen to pieces months ago.
The heavy plank steps half-hidden among them doubled back twice before
reaching Papaere Vurt's little cottage. Vurt had drilled holes for the
steps' spikes himself, just as he had built the little crane with his
own two hands, and fitted and nailed every board in the cottage's
verandah. It had taken him over a year, but the view made it all
worthwhile.

And what a view it was. The mountain itself ended only a hundred strides
beneath the cottage's floor. Beneath that lay empty air, a few birds,
and then, half a gallop below, the plains of eastern Darp. It was a long
way to fall...

Piaerre pulled himself back from the edge and made his way carefully
down the stairs, his satchel against his chest. He paused a moment on
the broad verandah that was his grandfather's pride and joy, then
thumped the weathered little drum hanging next to the cottage's
blue-and-orange door.

"Coming," Vurt shouted. The round mahogany peg on the end of his right
leg clunked on the floor inside. A moment later he pulled the door open.

"Morning," he said. "Wasn't expecting to see you today."

"My strap broke again." Piaerre held up his satchel.

"Damn thing. Really ought to get you a new one." His grandfather stepped
aside and waved him in.

The cottage only had two rooms. A narrow bed and a polished teak dresser
whose drawers hadn't been closed in years stood next to one wall in the
first. A silhouette portrait of Vurt's late wife hung over the bed; a
misshapen skull hung alone on the wall opposite it.

The second, larger, room served as kitchen, workshop, and (less
frequently than Piaerre's mother would have liked) bath. Dusty jars of
preserves looked down from their shelves at half-finished rabbit traps
with coiled bamboo springs and thorn teeth. An arm's length of rusty
chain, each link as big as Piaerre's hand, lay next to a cracked
hourglass whose sands had long since run out.

"Have you eaten?" Vurt asked.

"Yes, thanks," Piaerre said, his eyes watering slightly from the spices
sizzling in the battered black skillet on top of the stove.

"Good. Wouldn't be enough for the both of us."

As his grandfather gulled down his usual mix of scrambled eggs, bean
curds, dried chilis, and unripe tomatoes, Piaerre explain what had
happened the day before. Vurt frowned when he heard about the fine.
"I'd've taken the full two crowns," he said. "'Course, I'd've taken two
off your friend Fraederiq, too. Boy needs his hide striped."

"He's not my friend," Piaerre protested.

"Used to be. Niquolas, too. It's a shame they've both gone sour."

"They're not all bad," Piaerre said, with the instinctive solidarity of
youth against age. "Fraederiq does chores for Mamaere Mayeule
sometimes---and Niquolas minds Matthieu every Greensday afternoon."

"Mm hm, and gets paid for it. Now here, pass that over." Pushing aside
his skillet, he reached for his grandson's satchel.

Piaerre held it back. "Why would you have fined Jaromir at all? Those
stones aren't hurting anybody."

Vurt cleared his throat noisily. "It isn't about the stones, lad. It's
about the law. Start letting folks like this what's his name---"

"Jaromir."

"---Jaromir, start letting him think he can pick and choose which laws
he's going to obey, that'll just make 'em think there's hope for
changing things that aren't ever going to change. That Klaues fellow the
captain's so fond of has the right idea---don't try to change the rules,
just find a way to slide around them. Now, do you want me to look at
your bag or not?"

Piaerre took his books out of his satchel and passed it to his
grandfather. Vurt eyed the books sourly. "You know, it'd last longer if
you didn't load it up so much." He squinted at the stitching and clucked
his tongue. "Mm hm. It's not so bad. I can do it for you right now if
you want."

"Thanks, papaere."

"*Awshe*." He picked up his awl. "So, what happens next?"

Piaerre shrugged helplessly. "Fraederiq beats me to death with a stick?"

"Heh. Should have kept up your fencing lessons," his grandfather said
absently.

"It wasn't my idea to stop," Piaerre said defensively. When his
mother---Vurt's only daughter---had discovered that her father was teaching
Piaerre the basics of swordplay, she had put her foot down hard. Her son
was *not* going to be a rogue like his grandfather. He could learn bow
or spear for militia, like a good Avauntois, but there'd be no fencing,
and *definitely* no brawling.

Piaerre watched his grandfather work in silence, his mind on Jaromir's
homestone. Fraederiq's father Gaeston claimed that the Hett wore them as
a reminder of the fact that the mountain had once been theirs. "That's
why they ought to be banned," Gaeston had told Piaerre's father one
afternoon, not long after Question 29 had been put to the Parledoux. "If
even one of 'em thinks it's ever going to be theirs again, that's one
too many."

Piaerre couldn't remember what his father had said---something to calm
Gaeston down, most likely, or a joke to change the subject. But that
night, Piaerre's dozing dreams of Chaentelle doing laundry had been
interrupted by snatches of conversation from below. "I hear more of that
every time I go to Forecastle," Laeuc had said to Elaiene. "If the
captain doesn't do something about it, there'll be trouble when we
berth."

"Here. What do you think?" Vurt held up the satchel, breaking Piaerre's
gloomy reverie.

"It looks good. Thanks, papaere." Piaerre bit another sliver off his
much-abused thumbnail and wiped his hand on his pants. He took the
satchel and tugged on the strap. The new piece of leather felt stiff,
but would wear in quickly. "What do I owe you?"

"Gaaah." Papaere Vurt wrinkled his nose. "Clean the stove and we'll call
it a draw."

"All right." Piaerre stuck out his hand, grinning. His grandfather
pressed his palm against it with a businesslike nod. They both knew
Piaerre would have cleaned the stove anyway.

Vurt glanced at the rectangle of sunshine creeping across his battered
pine workbench. "You'd best be going."

"Yeah. Thanks again." Piaerre slipped his books back into the bag. There
were only six of them, but that was six more than most people in
Starboard Town read in a year.

He turned to go, then stopped himself. "Oh, I almost forgot---maere wants
to know, are you coming up for dinner tonight?"

Vurt shrugged. "Wasn't planning to. Plenty here I should use before it
goes off." Which was a lie, and they both knew it. "'Sides, I feel like
a gull, nipping off your plates."

Piaerre rolled his eyes. "You're not being a gull. And if you don't
come, maere'll spend the whole meal worrying about you, and then she'll
be down here tomorrow with a new pair of mittens and a basket full of
biscuits."

"Oh, *saad*, she hasn't gone and knit some more, has she?"

"Of course not. She baked them." He pretended to duck as his grandfather
growled and raised a fist. "But if you don't come, she'll probably make
you longjohns as well." He tried to leer. "You could always stop off at
Mamaere Mayeule's on the way back."

"Oh, could I now? Awful kind of you to give me permission."

Piaerre grinned and slung his satchel over his shoulder. "Anyway, I have
to go."

"All right." Vurt took his cane from the tool rack beside his workbench
and followed his grandson out onto the verandah. There, grandfather and
grandson paused a moment to admire the view.

Avaunt was still over the chaparral of eastern Darp, as it had been, and
would be, for weeks. Gray-green shrubs lay on the dry, red earth like
tufts of stained wool. Thin streams glistened between them at the bottom
of rocky, steep-sided gullies. A gallop away, a pair of giant stone
hands, weather but unbroken and six stories tall, reached toward the sky
as they had done since the time of the Uncertain Angels. No one knew
whether they were pleading, or waiting to catch a star that had yet to
fall; no one knew whether they were part of a buried giant, a side
effect of some spell wrought during the great war in which the Angels
had destroyed themselves, or merely some eccentric work of art. And
other than Piaerre, no one in Starboard Town much cared. The Angels had
fallen, the world carried on---if it wasn't disturbing the goats or the
beans, best to leave it be.

"See over there?" Piaerre said suddenly, pointing. "Horses."

"Good eyes," Vurt said, fishing his glasses out from under his shirt and
holding them up in front of his face. If there had been anyone else
there, he would have grunted and changed the topic, rather than
admitting that he could no longer see clearly at that distance. "You
think they're wild?"

Piaerre studied them for a moment. "Maybe," he said hesitantly. "I don't
know."

Vurt shook his head and pointed. "You're not looking. See back that way?
Next to the hands?" He waited until his grandson nodded. Two dismounted
riders lay in the shade with their heads on their saddles. "Probably
taking them to market. Coriandel, maybe, or Armaq." He tucked his
glasses back under his rough linen shirt. "You should get up to your
lessons."

"I suppose." Piaerre looked longingly at the world rolling by beneath
them. Four months ago, the land beneath the flying mountain had been
carpeted with dense green jungle. They had seen flocks of white-winged
birds take flight at dawn, and a herd of hippos stampede for safety when
a crocodile attacked. There had been villages, too, with tendrils of
smoke rising from the thatched roofs of their longhouses.

The jungle had given way to grassland as the mountain flew north, which
in turn had given way to the windblown grit of the Karaband Desert.
Piaerre and his grandfather had slung hammocks on the verandah then, and
slept under the stars. Piaerre's parents and sister joined them a few
times for dinner, and a few other townspeople came down as well to see
what there was to be seen, or keep Vurt up to date with the mountain's
gossip, or just to sit in silence and listen to the steady breeze of the
mountain's stately flight.

Most often, though, Piaerre and Vurt had the verandah to themselves. The
old man listened to his grandson describe what he had learned in his
lessons that day, telling him stories about life on the ground below in
return. They shared breaded dates that Piaerre bought from Mamaere
Mayeule on Redsday and Greensday mornings, and if one or the other
closed his eyes and breathed a little easier now and again, well, what
of it? No one fussed over Vurt, or asked him if he wanted yet another
cup of tea. No one bullied Piaerre, or made fun of all the words he
knew. They were both content, though only Vurt knew enough to know how
rare such contentment was.

A week ago, the flying mountain's shadow had crossed the River Wise,
which marked the halfway point of the mountain's journey from Mau
Ngapcha to Normous Berth. When they reached their northern destination,
the mountain's people would have two weeks to earn their livings. Silk,
mahogany, chocolate, nutmeg, mace, and cloves would come out of storage,
and be replaced by steel, wool, cider, and leather. And while Piaerre's
parents still claimed that they hadn't made up their minds, Vurt and
Piaerre both knew that Piaerre would leave the mountain then. The
hundreds of old books in the Captain's House, and the eclectic lessons
of a single eccentric bookster, were not enough. Piaerre was sixteen; if
he wanted to become a bookster himself, he had to leave the mountain and
find schooling elsewhere.

Vurt put his hand on his grandson's shoulder and shook him gently. "Well
then, off with you. Tell your mother I'll be there for dinner, if you
like."

"I will."

As Piaerre turned to go, his grandfather said, "Piaerre? You did the
right thing talking to the bosun."

Piaerre forced a smile. "Bet you Fraederiq doesn't think so."

His grandfather frowned. "Don't suppose he does. You watch out for him,
all right? He's trouble."

"I'll be careful," Piaerre promised. He forced a smile as Vurt squeezed
his shoulder, then started up the stairs.
