The door chimed to wake them. "Breakfast will be served on board," it
announced, "But there are tea and naan in the dining room if you would like
some."

The tea was very good. The naan was better, and the goopy, chunky orange
sweetness that one of their Marine escorts told them was called "marmalade" was
a revelation. "I'm sure there will be some on the train," he said when Iffy
picked up one of the small jars.

"It ain't fer me." She handed it to Aunt Naggie. "Will you give this t'Honesty
when she wakes up? An' tell her---" She took a deep breath. "Tell her I'll be
thinkin' about her."

Every goodbye hug is either too long or too short. Theirs felt like it was
both. When it was done and they had both wiped their eyes, Aunt Naggie let one
of the Marines lead her away. Iffy followed the other down a corridor, around a
corner, and through a heavy steel blast door that her special ability instantly
told her had been salvaged from a pre-war Russian cruiser and was laced with
conductive carbon nanofibers capable of shrugging off a plasma blast from
anything smaller than an orbital cannon.

The truck that waited for her was smaller and more serious than the one that had
picked them up the day before. She and the Marine sat side by side under a
canvas cover, neither speaking, as it took them around the outskirts of
Paddington South to the train station. It was little more than a four-story
shed with reinforced walls, half a dozen cranes of various ages and
descriptions, and a single heated room lined with shelves as crowded as those in
Mr. Mishra's shop. Gunsights and surveying lasers, a pair of lemon-yellow boots
that reached to Iffy's armpits, foamed glass boxes full of gears and screws and
wire, all carefully labelled---she suddenly felt homesick, and wondered if
Mr. Mishra and the Sandhus had heard about the attack on the *Guinevere* and
what they would think when they found out that she and Aunt Naggie had finally
left Uncle Jack.

"Where's e'ryone else?" she asked.

The Marine checked his data feed with a blink. "They are on their way,
citizen---two minutes until arrival."

"An' where's the train?" She gestured at the empty rails. "It ain't much of a
train station without a train."

He blinked again. "I apologize, citizen, but that information is still
classified. Please make yourself comfortable."

Wishing she had taken a second jar of marmalade, Iffy pulled a crate plastered
with faded biohazard stickers closer to the wall and sat on it.

Two minutes later a reconnaisance drone zipped into the train station. A trio
of trucks arrived a few moments later, bringing with them the bustle and noise
of people getting ready for a journey. Marines unloaded boxes and machinery,
the little motors in the joints of their exoskeletons whining occasionally as
they picked up something heavy. Iffy wasn't surprised to see Doctor Johel climb
out of one of the trucks. What made her gasp was the heavy exoskeleton she had
on. "Won't be much use without it," the old woman said, patting it with an
armored hand. Wireframes took shape behind Iffy's eyes to show how the exo's
bulky boots could unfold to act as snowshoes and the six different kinds of
destruction housed in its comically bulky forearms and hunched back.

Johnson Wales was the last person off the trucks. He nodded to Iffy and handed
her a toolbox, then tucked a mango into her coat pocket with a wink. "Thanks,"
she said. "But where's th' train?"

The concrete beneath her boots rumbled in answer. Wales muttered something
under his breath. "You might want to step back," he said more loudly to Iffy.

The rumbling intensified. Slowly, like a ship sinking in reverse, a blunt-nosed
locomotive rose into the gap between the station's two platforms from its
underground resting place. As soon as it rolled forward a second car rose
behind it, then a third, and finally a second locomotive.

Iffy watched open-mouthed until the rumbling stopped and the Marines hurried
forward to begin loading equipment. "Because someone thought they'd be harder
to detect if they were hidden under ten meters of bedrock," he said sourly.
"Didn't occur to them that if you drive two hundred meters of train into a
fifty-meter shed, detecting them isn't really a problem."

Rice in cubical cartons and beans in square-sided bags. Ammunition in a variety
of shapes and sizes, and weapons that could make use of each one. A power cell
that took four Marines to lift. A collapsible surgical theater and a freezer
container marked "Organs". A single bulky pack for each Marine, extras for
Doctor Johel, Wales, and Iffy---the train cars swallowed it all. Once it was
stowed, a pair of Marines scrambled onto the roof of each car, one at the front,
one at the rear, and clipped themselves on with safety lines. A moment later
their armor blurred and silvered to match the metal tone of the train.

"All aboard," Wales said lightly. Iffy nodded. She hadn't been afraid before,
but she was now.

The door hissed shut behind her. Inside, the car wasn't nearly as fancy as the
one from *Murder on the Transantarctic Express*. The chairs sat on swiveling
bases and were padded to cushion passengers against acceleration. There was a
toilet stall at one end, a little kitchen at the other, and right in the middle,
Doctor Johel with her visor up and one arm free from her bulky exoskeleton so
that she could sip tea from a travel mug with the old British flag on its side.

"Acceleration in thirty seconds," the train said. Iffy and Wales took seats
behind Doctor Johel's and buckled themselves in. "Fifteen seconds. Laser
de-icing enabled. Plume suppression enabled. Ten seconds. Nine, eight..." *I
should have gone to the toilet*, Iffy realized, and then the voice said, "Two,
one, acceleration," and a giant hand pressed her softly back into her seat as
the train shot forward, picking up speed with every meter.

She had expected it to rumble and shake. She had expected she would have
trouble breathing, like characters in sims about rocket launches, but it was
nothing like that. Instead, it was quiet, smooth, and a little disappointing.
Then she looked out the window and her disappointment evaporated. They were
going *fast*, faster than she'd ever gone in her life. Snow-covered cairns of
ground rock shot past the window, growing larger by the second as Paddington
South disappeared behind them until eventually they merged into long, sinuous
ridges. She gasped as the train dove into a tunnel and almost instantly
re-emerged.

"Is this what flyin's like?" she asked Wales, awed by their speed. "Or goin'
into space?"

He smiled, his eyes on the landscape. "Pretty close. Look, there's the
*Scranton*. And the *Brule*." He pointed at a pair of distant dark shapes that
Iffy had taken for more mining waste. The window obediently zoomed in to show
two hulking machines, each one big enough to use the *Bengal* and the
*Guinevere* as bath toys. Snow had piled up against their enormous treads and
on their decks, and they were surrounded by debris from the explosions that had
crippled them during the final days of the war, but even in ruin, they sent a
chill up Iffy's spine. Something... She shook her head. She was supposed to
tell someone something, but she couldn't remember who or what...

"Would either of you like some tea?" Doctor Johel asked, breaking into Iffy's
troubled thoughts. She took a sip from her antique travel mug and gestured with
it at the little kitchen. "It will probably be the last decent brew you get for
a while."

Wales declined, so Iffy did as well, but she did make belated and grateful use
of the toilet. When she returned, Wales and Doctor Johel were studying a
wireframe of a building complex. Rooms and stairways and elevators flickered in
and out of existence as the core mixed and juggled plans for other satellite
ground stations and records of various military research labs to sketch what
they might find when they reached their destination.

Doctor Johel finally waved it away and closed her eyes to nap. Iffy had no idea
how she could sleep sitting up, especially sitting up inside an exoskeleton, but
as her face relaxed and she started to snore, Iffy realized once again just how
old she was and how tired she must be.

"Here," Wales said, bringing up some more schematics. "Have a look at these."
An angular dragonfly the size of her head rotated and flew apart to show
cameras, antennas, a nuclear battery the size of her thumb that could last ten
thousand years, and all around it, the shimmering flow of the software that
brought it all to life.

Wales froze the display and tapped an unremarkable orange lozenge. "That's our
way in, if it's still there." He sat back and studied the sparkling lines that
spiralled out from the subroutine he had selected.

"Why woul'n't it be?" Iffy asked.

Wales shrugged. "They could have been hacked during the war. Or someone might
have pressed the panic button to kill ground control so that they couldn't be.
A lot can happen in a hundred years." He looked out at the pulverized waste on
either side of them and repeated, "A lot can happen."

The track didn't run all the way to Mount Tyree. Instead, the train slowed,
slowed, and stopped on the floor of a broad valley. Twenty kilometers away, the
mountain's peak thrust up proudly above its neighbors. Iffy zipped herself into
an ecosuit that smelled freshly printed and followed Doctor Johel and Wales out
onto the snowfield.

The icy wind whistled in her earphones as she helped the Marines unpack and
assemble their snow scooters. It felt good to be useful, even if the ecosuit's
padded gloves made her hands clumsy.

----


"An' what if we decide we'd rather not stick around?"
Uncle Jack demanded,
belligerent once again now that the danger had passed.
"You gonna put *surveillance* on us t' make sure we stay put?"

Iffy gulped.
Computer cores had watched people every moment of every day for years
in the run-up to their rebellion.
Humanity had designed them to do that,
and had come close to extinction as a result.
Children learned that surveillance was evil
at the same as they were potty trained.
Accusing someone of doing it was a lot even by Uncle Jack's standards.
