---
layout: narrow
title: Six Letters (None Complete)
permalink: /six-letters/
---

## First Letter

Anyalcze<br>
The Sign of Three Pears<br>
17 Chalcedony 1223

My dearest brother,

I kiss you upon your left cheek, I kiss you upon your right.  And with formality
satisfied, I ask you, where is my money?  You promised you would send enough to
redeem me from this garlicky wasteland!  I weep with desperation.  We are
Sarkoszkys, you and I; how is the world fallen, that one of our family should be
reduced to---

Oh, I cannot put it to paper.  I can barely *say* it, though I must hear it,
five mornings a week.  "Good morning, Your Grace.  Your *tutor* is here." That
word, "tutor".  It is an iron spike, no, a pair of them, one hammered into each
ear with the gusto of a tradesman.  I swear in blood, each time I hear it, I am
*this* close to throwing myself off the walls of Her so-called Grace's so-called
castle from shame.

And the girl herself---oh, brother, brother, put out of your mind the buxom
Praczny maidens in those slim volumes we discovered beneath the account books in
Father's library, so soon and so creatively unmaidened.  Her "Grace" has the
physique of a lowland ox, and not half the wit.  She can barely speak her own
tongue; such decency as this place has left me forbids me from describing what
she does to *ours*.  Never have I loved Uwsian more than now, when I must
listen---no, must *collaborate*, may all the unnamed saints forgive me---while
my dullard pupil flays and quarters the language you and I cherish, then shits
upon its wretched remains.

To paint salt on the burn, the hopes I was so foolish as to express in my last
letter regarding her brother have been slaughtered most cruelly.  (Did it reach
you?  If so, then *where is my money!?*) He has some wit, yes, but of a low and
cunning sort, unilluminated by any real spark of enlightenment.  I admit---I
freely admit---that I mis-read him.  Oh, I can hear your guffaws now, you churl.
Me, mis-read a boy?  Yes.  That is how cloddish this crapulent wilderness has
made me.  Oh, brother, brother, you must rescue me.  You must---

My apologies.  The duke's courier rose from his table then, as if to depart.  As
it is my plan to slip this letter unnoticed into the packet he carries (as I am
*too impoverished* to pay him to carry it for me), I was about to pursue some
stratagem, I know not what, to delay him until I could sign it, but on event, he
sought merely to relieve himself, and has now returned.  I think him no keener
to be out in the rain this night than the innkeeper's pigs, which are farting
and snoring in front of the fire not three strides from me.  You see what I am
reduced to?

But the brother.  It wasn't the usual, not this time.  *This* time it was about
money.  There, I've said it again.  Money, money, money.  I needed some, but had
none, and thought to enlist the duke-in-waiting to remedy that, that---drought?
Shortcoming?  Bah.  I cannot even find words any longer.  I am become no more
than the second pig from the left.  In brief, in place of verb conjugations and
well-rolled R's, I filled the brother's lessons with tales of derring-do, of
swashes buckled and monsters slain, taking care always to point out the skills a
true hero must have.  Not just swordplay (here, I shake my head), not just the
parrying of one's enemy's blows, and the hewing of his limbs.  Why, the great
heroes of old were also adept at climbing ropes and picking locks, at skulking
and scurrying and all manner of thieverous what-not.  Upon my blood, yes, they
were!

And of course, from there it was but a carter's nudge to persuade him (but never
in so many words) that a hero-to-be like himself had a right, nay, a *duty*, to
acquire said skills.  And how better to do it than by filching a few odds and
ends from his sister's chambers?  Oh, but his eyes lit up at that.  His sister,
whose impending marriage to our dung-sloth of a cousin would leave him a guest
in his own home; his sister, who wore more gold on two fingers than he had to
his name; his sister, who called him "darling Pupsy" in front of his friends on
his fifteenth nameday.  Oh yes, he---

Another false alarm.  The courier stirred once again, but he only wished to
scratch the ears of one of the innkeeper's pigs in order to disguise his own
release of flatulence.  Pfah!  Have I mentioned the garlic these people eat?
Brother, dear brother, please, I will shave my head and swear my soul to the
Balance if Father demands it, only send me fifty bezels for the carriage home
and lodging on the way.  Or sixty, should you love me, so that I may drink
myself senseless each night so that memory of this place does not overburden my
dreams.

So, again, the boy.  I thought him caught, like a sparrow in a spider's web.  He
would do the skulking and scurrying (his heart pitter-pat the while, I am sure,
to be in the Women's Yard uninvited, an ear worse taken if caught), and I would
dispose of whatever filchings he brought me.  Of course, I didn't tell him that
outright.  No, my plan was that I would, with the aid of a rogue I met under
circumstances I shall *not* trust to paper, transform Her Bovine Grace's jewellery
into more negotiable assets and away.

But speak not for the snake, eh?  Speak not for the snake lest a tiger speak for
thee.  The boy---

---

## Second Letter

Pelkoyniskiiy Mansion<br>
Nevy Rav<br>
8<sup>th</sup> day Sapphire, 1224<sup>th</sup> Year Since Their Departure<br>

His Grace, Anton Usrachiakov Duke Berion<br>
His residence<br>
Polgotseny Town

Respected Sir Anton,

I kiss you upon your left cheek, I kiss you upon your right.

I write with regard to the letter enclosed, which was included in a packet of
correspondence My Lord was honored to receive from His Grace the Duke of
Anyalcze-in-Praczedt, on or about 15<sup>th</sup> Amethyst past.  As you will no
doubt have noticed, while the letter is addressed to a member of your household,
the seal upon it has been broken.  What inspection alone may not reveal is that
the letter has been read by myself.

For this, I offer my most sincere apology.  I assure you, no Pelkoy would ever
intentionally read the correspondence of any other gentleman, or of any he knew
to be in the service, standing, or employ of a gentleman.  How then came the
seal to be broken and the letter to be read?

Thus: the packet was delivered by courier in mid-Malachite, on the day after the
first great storm of this past winter.  As I am sure you recall, the storm was
fiercer than usual for its season---much fiercer than My Lord's magician, the
honored Urptenchauenchut, had foreseen.  Our household was therefore less well
prepared than it would have been in prior days, when less trust was put in such
persons.

It was the work of several days for our serfs to bring in the last of their crops
and cattle, re-roof such dwellings as had been damaged, &c., during which time
the packet was neglected.  If I recall correctly, I did not even bring it to My
Lord's attention at that time, believing it would be spring at the earliest
before the courier would be able to return to Anyalcze-in-Praczedt with a reply.

At some point during those days, one of my servants placed some accounts I had
requested atop the packet on my desk.  I had him whipped for his error when it
was discovered, but that does not change the fact that the packet was not then
opened until three days past.

I trust you will therefore forgive that I took less care going through the
packet than I otherwise would have.  The bulk of it was simple commercial
correspondence.  The rest comprised revisions to a contract of marriage which My
Lord and His Grace have been negotiating, and a dozen perfumed letters from His
Grace's daughter to My Lord's son, which I gave immediately to My Lord's sister
for inspection.

It was then that I made the error for which I have offered my apology.  My
Lord's sister chose to inspect the letters from His Grace's daughter, and
insisted upon reading aloud some passages whose tangled grammar she found
particularly amusing.  While distracted, I took the next letter from the packet
and broke its seal.  I then read the first page, and part of the second, without
truly taking in what was before my eyes.

I ceased as soon as it was clear that the letter was not intended for My Lord or
any of his household.  However, My Lord's sister noticed my discomfort, ceasing
her recitation and asking what was wrong.  Disregarding my demurrals, she drew
from me a precis of what I had accidentally gleaned.  I confess that I was not
as loathe to confide in her as a gentleman in my position perhaps should have
been, as I of course realized the identity of the letter's author, and realized
that I had inadvertently placed myself in the sort of delicate quandary which is
most properly a lady's province.

I beseech you not to take offense if I tell you, plainly, one gentleman to
another, that your grandson's hasty departure from Polgotseny these three
summers past has been much discussed.  My Lord's sister informed me that the
greater part of her circle believed the cause to be gambling debts, though some
claimed (solely out of malice, I am sure) that one of your neighbors had sworn
revenge against him for some unnatural act.  On that basis, she suggested that
the letter should be delivered to you, rather than to its intended his brother,
in order to apprise you of its author's whereabouts and current state.

I protested, of course, informing her that I felt it improper for one gentleman
to traffic with another's correspondence.  At this, she rephrased her suggestion
as instruction, stating that it was in fact our duty to put the interests of
your family above those of your grandson.  I was moved by her argument,
imagining what My Lord would desire if any of his own should ever place the
reputation of his family in such peril.

Thus, the letter.  And also, at the request of My Lord's sister, a suggestion,
which she likens to turning this grain of sand into a pearl.  As you know, His
Majesty has long neglected the growing lawlessness on our mutual southern
border, so much so that My Lord has been compelled to contemplate a
marriage-alliance with

---

## Third Letter

On the road southeast of Nevy Rav<br>
The first week of Chrysoprase, 1224<br>
Sweet's words by Buckle's hand<br>

Mistress,

Excuse handwriting please.  Master says, something still hunts us.  I say, I do
not see its shadow, I do not smell its breath.  Master says, horses know more
than hairless monkeys what it is to be hunted, so I darken my mouth and write
what he tells me to.

The letters with this come to us in Nevy Rav.  Master does not wish to winter
there, but there is an early storm.  I find work in the Graf's stables to pay
for master's hay and barley.  It would not be enough, but some coin is left from
the business in Vnir.  (I write for myself, I am only asked to sell master four
times in five months.  He says, this proves Uwsians know nothing of good
horses.)

When I tell the stablemistress we will leave, she orders me to the postmaster.
"There is a law," she says, that every traveller must carry mail if there is mail
to carry.  She says there will be silver in it.  Master and I want only to be
over the mountains to Darp, but it will draw eyes, a penniless Darpani saying no
to silver.  And as you say many, many times, "There is no letter not worth
reading."

(Master asks, am I writing clearly?  I say, I can write more clearly if you walk
more slowly.  Master says, if I walk slowly, we will not be hunted any longer.
We will be dinner.)

The postmaster asks me what road we take.  I say south to the Nettelin, then
upriver to the Black Grass.  He finds three letters that wish to go that way,
then tells me to come back in the morning for more.  I say, to be away now,
today.  He says no, there is a law, the postmaster must have the criers announce
mail for the south, and I must wait one full day after their cry.  I argue and
plead, but he says, there is a law.  He gives me a silver-heart penny for my
trouble, though.

(Mistress, the postmaster of Nevy Rav is half-Darpani.  He has the Five Hands on
his left forearm, and the Arrow Eagle on his right, but no other tattoos we
could see.  He is fond of drink, but not a drunkard, and does not seem to
gamble.  Master says, he would probably not serve you knowingly, but someone in
need could play on his feelings for clan and tribe.  Also, he keeps mail in
wooden boxes on a shelf in his office.  Their locks are simple, and I do not
smell any magic on them.)

We wait the rest of the day, then the next.  I sleep in the stable with the
master to save the penny.  The stablemistress comes to me in the night, but I
pretend not to understand her.  On the dawn, we return to the postmaster.  There
are no more letters, so we take the three, and a note with the postmaster's mark
to say they are not stolen, and leave by the cattle gate.

A man waits for us there, horsed, in furs, with his hood pulled low.  Master
says I should write his name carefully: Sir Georgiy Chorichiakov Pelkoy, Knight
Jurist in service of the Graf.  Master says you will know this name from prior
times.

He is one of those who asked to buy the master, so I think his aim is to steal
what I will not sell.  I put my hand to my bow, but he raises his empty to greet
me.  "Clean luck that I have not missed you," he said, for he has a letter to
carry south that the postmaster is not to see.  He gives it to me with a half
bezel of good silver, and a promise of a full bezel more upon its delivery in
Polgotseny.

I take his letter and give him a horseback bow.  "I will deliver it," I say, but
I do not say to who.  Others approach on the road, so he leaves me.

(Mistress, master says to tell you the knight was *skulking*.  He says to tell
you Sir Georgiy seemed bursting to ask, "What is the secret password?")

Master has me ride off the Great Coast Road onto an oxcart track that night to
make camp, then open the letter and read it to him.  The seal is easily lifted.
There are two hairs inside the letter, by chance or so that the intended reader
can know if it had been opened.  (Master says, or as a signal, like hunters tie
knots in grass.  We are moving again now, more quickly than before.  If master
begins to trot, I will put this aside.  May the First Woman and the Last Man
shelter our souls.)

The writing in the first letter is that of a young man, Uwsian, well-schooled,
and right-handed.  It is good paper, but cheap ink and a poor pen.  The paper
smells of flowers.

The second letter is in a stronger hand, also on good paper, and blessedly
unscented.  Master says we will take them both to your woman in Burning Rock if
we make it that far and have Sir Georgiy's rewritten as in times past to
strengthen its tone.  (He says he hopes this is what you would want, then says
other things about what magicians do and do not want.  I will not write what he
says after that.)

Something comes now on the wind.  It smells of death and magic and hungry
purpose, and the master says you are wrong, the thing you see in your dreams

---

## Fourth Letter

His Highness, Thokmay Prince Gandan (renounced)<br>
The Collegium<br>
Gandan-in-Gandan<br>
19<sup>th</sup> Malachite, 1251<sup>st</sup> Year Since<br>

The Lady Kembe<br>
Her residence<br>
Ossisswe

Most honored lady,

Please excuse my audacity in approaching you, even at so great a distance,
without prior introduction.  I can only surmise how busy someone with your wide
and varied interests must be; I trust you will forgive my intrusion once I make
its matter plain.

I am writing to you at this time because I have recently come into possession of
certain letters whose disposition I believe may be of substantial interest to
you.  It is my belief that public knowledge of these letters would be a stain
upon Your Grace's reputation; I am therefore hopeful that some mutually
agreeable arrangement for their disposition or destruction can be found.

The matter is this: for the past year, I have been preparing an Argument to
place before the governors of the Collegium in the hope that they will me worthy
of elevation to the rank of Scholar Ordinary.  At the advice the Balance
Petcharatiriv, I selected as the subject of my Argument the causes of the
rebellion in Uws in YS 1224-26.  "Half of the survivors wound up here when it
was all over," (if I may quote the Balance directly), "And half of them are
still alive, so why not ask them what they thought it was all about?"

Accordingly, I have spent these past months traipsing from one bastion of
tattered grandeur to another in order to ask a succession of exiled landgrafs
and faded knights-justiciar whether they had felt threatened by Yuriy II
Barsadov's administrative reforms, when they first learned that the Pelkoys and
Berions had raised the old Sarkoszy banner, why they decided to put on rebel
ribbons, &c.

It was on one of these visits that I came into possession of the letters to
which I alluded earlier, the first pages of which I have faithfully copied and
appended to this of mine.  In between draughts of a particularly pungent
home-brewed *otrava*, their owner informed me that in the years prior to the
rebellion, it had been his honor to serve as a knight-warden in the Pelkoy
domains in the south of Uws.  Early in 1224, his patrol intercepted a badly
wounded Darpani, in whose possession he discovered several letters.  In the
confusion of that spring, he claims, he set the letters aside, only thinking of
them again these twenty-five years later when prompted by my questions.

The letters are, to wit:

Item, from a "Gentleman", written in the style of that scurrilous travelogue,
*The Customs, Laws, and Language of Northern Praczedt: A Guide For Those So
Fortunate As To Have Been Born Elsewhere*.  This appears to prove that the
"Gentleman" was Sir Josep Antonikov Pelkoy, later husband of Her Grace the
Duchess of Anyalcze.

Item, from Sir Georgiy Chorichiakov, conspirator and rebel, to Duke Anton
Berion, the same, verifying the authenticity of the first letter, and in passing
rehearsing the matter which formed the basis for the rebellion, to wit: that
lawlessness had increased under the reign of the Barsadovs.

Item, and of most immediate interest, from a Gifted horse named Sweet, put to
paper with interjections by someone named Buckle (most probably the Darpani
courier mentioned above).  The letter's intended recipient is not named, but is
addressed as "Mistress", a title which, as all Cherne knows, agents in your
employ often use for you.

This third letter is what has prompted mine to you.  If you were in fact the one
for whom the letter was written, it suggests that you did not simply observe the
events of YS 1224.  I have found it impossible not to speculate on how His
Majesty's heirs would react to this revelation.  At the least,

---

## Fifth Letter

The Collegium<br>
Gandan-in-Gandan<br>
Yellowsday, 3<sup>rd</sup> Tourmaline, 1252 YS

The Lady Kembe,<br>
Her residence,<br>
Ossisswe

Honored lady,

Please excuse my use of soldierly language this morning---I did not expect words
to write themselves in the fog on my shaving mirror, and did myself a very minor
injury with my razor when they appeared.  By way of apology, I hope you will
accept the apple brandy that accompanies this letter; it was laid down in the
last year of His Majesty my grandfather's time, and the Balance Petcharatiriv
tells me that it may bring back fond memories for you.

Thank you also for the packet of letters which I found had appeared on my desk.
I agree, the one purporting to be from me is a creditable forgery, and might
well have fooled a reader without your special gifts.  In answer to your
questions:

Item, yes, someone *did* burst into flames a little after yesterday today, to
wit, my tutor, a Scholar Stipendiary named Andrae Ghislaine é Marcque.  He came
to Gandan from Araña some eight or nine years ago and has been my occasional
tutor these past two years.  I have spoken to my father's Minister of Rumors,
who assures me that her agents never had any indication that *Sra* Andrae was
criminally inclined.

Item, no, I do not recall *Sra* Andrae's mood being particularly dark over the
past few months.  While I agree that Gandan's winters may seem damp and gray to
someone accustomed to southern skies, he had weathered the previous seven with
no apparent ill effect.  And if I may be so bold, I would also venture that if
he *did* find our weather, food, or conversation unbearable, a man of his
intelligence could undoubtedly have found a more reliable way of committing
suicide than attempting to blackmail a magician.

Having answered your questions, I would now be grateful if you would be willing
to entertain some of my own.  From the scorch marks on the forged letter, the
Balance infers that you used it to work this morning's spell.  (She wishes me to
ask whether it was Idjfikan's Long Reach, or the Bantangui variant of Moescher's
Immolation.) I myself am much more interested in the other pages, as they bear
directly upon the Argument I am preparing.  Do you believe them to be true
copies of authentic originals?  Fully a dozen of the Collegium have presented an
Argument at one time or another regarding the identity of the "Gentleman"; if
the first letter is trustworthy, it would put that matter to rest.  The second
letter would completely refute my Argument that the rebellion of 1224 was a
spontaneous matter, while the third would, as *Sra* Andrae suggested, cast a
certain light upon your

---

## Sixth Letter

Ossisswe<br>
Greensday 22 Sapphire '52

His Highness, Thokmay Prince Gandan (renounced)<br>
The Collegium<br>
Gandan-in-Gandan

Your Highness,

Received yours of 3 Tourm. 52 this morning.  First page intact but stained,
other pages missing entirely.  Deduce from this that fifty-year-old brandy was
too great a temptation for at least one courier on the road between Gandan and
Ossisswe.  Doubt anyone at this end would be brave enough to open something
addressed to me; suggest inquiry at your end, followed by whipping.

Regarding questions in yours, I receive more inquiries regarding historical,
legal, and genealogical matters with each passing year.  Were I to answer even a
tenth part of them, I would have no waking hours left to devote to the events of
the present day.

Even were I to answer, would you actually know more than you do now?  If I said
a Gifted horse named Sweet was doing my bidding in Uws at the time of the
rebellion, would you then know the truth?  No---you would instead have to ask
yourself whether I was misleading you for some further purpose own.  (You would
most certainly ask yourself that if I said I did *not* have an agent then and
then, would you not?)

Once you enter this jungle, you are lost.  Was the first letter a forgery?  Some
scoundrel could have impersonated *Sra* Josep Antonikov so as to wheedle money
from his brother.  Or someone closer to home could have forged the letter to
embarrass the family.

Or perhaps the first letter is authentic, and the second is a forgery.  Or
perhaps the first two are authentic, but the third was a plant by that prissy
toad Yuriy to convince Duke Anton (who was honest and brave, but a rather dull
knife) that his kingdom's troubles were my fault.

And what of your own letter?  I do not need magic to tell me that Balance
Petcharatiriv cast an eye over it: as your teacher, she has no doubt cautioned
you that royal haughtiness is best set aside when speaking to me.  That bottle
of brandy---was the idea of sending it truly yours, or did it grow from a seed
she planted in your mind?  Perhaps it is a signal saying, "War with Lhabde seems
certain," or, "I have run out of pistachios, please send some more." You cannot
know.

And what of *this* letter?  Was it even truly been written by Lady Kembe, or is
the hand holding the pen that of some rival who wishes to lead you astray for
reasons of their own?  Are any of these letters authentic?  As much as this one
is: they are letters, and in the end, that is all we can know.

*Kembe, by her own hand, or not*
