## At Night

Prince Thokmay and Sergeant Gyalpa took turns sleeping through what
passed for night in the Blight. They didn't re-light the fire. It was
so cold by the time morning came that the prince shivered through the
whole of his last watch.

"It's cold, isn't it, Your Highness?" Sergeant Gyalpa finally said
without opening his eyes.

"I've been colder," the prince chattered, "Up in the mountains. But
not by much."

This time Sergeant Gyalpa did open his eyes, and sit up. He rubbed his
knee for a moment, then settled back on his elbows. "What was it like,
Your Highness?" he asked. "If you don't mind my asking."

"I didn't feel any different afterward, if that's what you mean,"
Prince Thokmay said. "It's probably easiest to show you." People had
asked him that question a hundred different ways in the four years
since his return from Stale. His answers had always seemed
inadequate. The magician Barramarrabee had finally taken pity on him,
and given him something to help explain.

He fished around in his pocket for a moment and pulled out a loop of
string. "I think this is the right one," he said, handing it to the
sergeant.

Sergeant Gyalpa looked at suspiciously. "What is it?"

"It's a knot that can't be untied," the prince told him. "The wizard
Sebastian made it, a long time ago. One of the magicians at court gave
it to me."

The sergeant examined the knot. "Doesn't look hard," he hedged. "Just
a half-snake under."

"Go ahead, try it," the prince urged.

Sergeant Gyalpa raised his eyebrows, then took off his gloves and
started to untie the knot. At least, that's what he set out to do.
Somehow, though, he dropped the string as he was taking off his left
glove. He had to hunt around a second to find it. When he picked it
up, it caught on a button on one of the side pockets of his
trousers. When he tried to tug it free, it slipped through his
fingers. He cursed under his breath and picked it up again more
carefully.

A couple of minutes later, he had finally managed to get a firm grip
on the string using both hands, only to find that he didn't have any
fingers left to untie it. "It really doesn't like me, does it?" he
said in exasperation, and then added, "Your Highness."

"No, it doesn't," the prince agreed. "And if you hung it from a nail,
and tried to work on it that way, you'd stumble and bang your head.
That's how I got this." He pointed at a small scar on his forehead.
"It's not that the knot is difficult, it just...can't be untied." He
looked straight at the sergeant, holding the man's eyes for a moment
as Mope had taught him. "That's what it was like. Nothing changed,
except that I could never be king."

Neither spoke for a few moments. The emptiness of the twisted land
around them seemed to fill every space, every silence. "What was it
like for you?" the prince finally asked. "I mean, growing old so
quickly."

The sergeant cleared his throat. "Doesn't feel special," he said after
a moment's reflection. "I guess anyone who's a soldier gets old too
fast, whether they're in the Blight or not."

They traveled as before. Sergeant Gyalpa rode on Bucket, while Prince
Thokmay walked along beside them. They saw mud and rocks, bushes and
trees, but nothing that moved except an occasional bird, far in the
distance.  Prince Thokmay tried to count his footsteps to keep track of
how far they had come, but kept forgetting whether he was in the three
hundreds or five hundreds. He supposed it didn't really matter in the
Blight anyway.

He was startled out of his bleak daydream by Sergeant Gyalpa's voice.
"Look, Your Highness," the sergeant said, pointing. It took Prince
Thokmay a moment to realize that all the sergeant was pointing at was a
few brown blades of grass, and a lone dandelion.

"Is it dangerous?" the prince asked.

Sergeant Gyalpa laughed. "No, Your Highness. It's just a plain old
dandelion. They don't grow in the deep Blight. They don't like the
magic." The sergeant scanned the hills around them. "We must be coming
out of it, but I don't recognize where we are."

They saw the next dandelion ninety-two paces later. There was another
thirty-six paces after that, and another after that. Slowly,
grudgingly, the rocky brown earth let normal life take hold. The
prince couldn't help but grin the first time he saw a startled rabbit
streak away from them.

The sergeant noticed his grin. "It's always good coming out of there,
Your Highness." He tipped his head back slightly and sniffed. "And is
that water I smell?"

Bucket sped up as they crested a small rise. The road ran down on the
other side to the roofless ruins of a one-room mill on the banks of
the slow-moving Trout. A stand of apple trees had gone wild near what
was left of the mill's walls. A few brown logs poking up out of the
river like rotten teeth showed where the mill's loading dock had been.

Sergeant Gyalpa let Bucket follow her head down the hill and into the
trees. As she bit an apple off a low-hanging branch, he clambered out
of the saddle and put his arm around Prince Thokmay's shoulder. "It'll
be safe to light a fire here, Your Highness," he said, wincing as they
shuffled over to what was left of the mill building. "Then we can
figure out how we're going to get back to town."

They were just a few feet away from the building when Prince Thokmay
heard Bucket snort, then neigh loudly. "Back me!" Sergeant Gyalpa said
loudly, taking his arm from the prince's shoulders, drawing his sword,
and turning to his right, all at the same time.

Prince Thokmay drew his own sword and turned to his left, so that he
and the sergeant were facing in opposite directions. "What's
happening?" he whispered loudly.

"Something's up there," the sergeant said shortly. He stood
motionless, searching the mill, the river bank, and the knee-high
summer grass with his eyes. "Can you see anything in the trees?"

The prince swallowed. "No," he said, trying to match the sergeant's
calm tone. "Nothing except Bucket."

"Stay with me," the sergeant ordered the prince. He half-hopped,
half-limped forward. Prince Thokmay stepped backward to stay with him,
keeping his sword in front of him and holding his left arm straight
out from his side for balance.

"RRAAAAWWWWRRR!!" Rust charged at them from around the corner of the
old mill. The prince whirled around as Sergeant Gyalpa cursed, hopping
to keep his balance. She batted Sergeant Gyalpa's sword out of his
hand, then reared up on her hind legs as the sergeant toppled
backward, cursing.

"Throw it on the ground!" she snarled to the prince. "Now!"

"Keep back!" he shouted at her. He lunged at her belly. Too late, he
realized that she had tricked him. She stepped nimbly aside and batted
his head with her paw. The blow knocked him flat.

He lay there for a moment in a daze with the world swimming around
him.  It steadied and came back into focus. His head started to pound
at the same moment.

"Your Highness, are you all right?" The sergeant rolled over and
dragged himself over to Prince Thokmay.

"He's all right," the bear rumbled. She had dropped back onto all
fours.  She sniffed at them, then lumbered over to the prince's sword
and carefully picked it up in her jaws. She set it down against a
stone and stepped on it. The sword bent slightly, then snapped with a
sharp *crack!* A moment later, the sergeant's sword made the same
sound.

Sergeant Gyalpa helped the prince sit up. "What are you doing here?"
he mumbled.

"I was about to ask you the same question," the bear said. She glanced
over at the stand of apple trees, from which Bucket was nervously
watching them. Rust bunched her shoulders and charged at the horse
with another huge roar. The horse turned and galloped away.

"Stupid animals," Rust muttered under her breath, watching the horse
disappear over the top of the hill. "None of 'em have ever been
gifted, did you know that?"

Prince Thokmay stood up as she approached. "Where's my sister?" he
demanded. "What have you done with her?"

"She's down by the river," Rust said, then snarled, "No!" as the
prince made to dodge around her. She nodded her head ponderously at
the sergeant. "Help him up. We all go together. And we all go
*slowly*, you hear? Slowly."

Even if the bear hadn't been two watchful steps behind him, Prince
Thokmay couldn't have gone quickly with Sergeant Gyalpa's arm around
his shoulder. The sergeant seemed much less steady than he had been
before the bear had ambushed them. Prince Thokmay hoped he was
exaggerating his lameness.

They came around the corner. A sturdy-looking river raft was
half-hidden in the brambles that had grown up against the side of the
mill, where the door to the loading dock had once been. And on the
raft---

"Ogmin!" Prince Thokmay cried. His sister was sitting in the middle of
the raft next to a crude lean-to. She had drawn up her knees and
buried her face in them. She still had her nightdress on, and a
too-large coat and a ragged pair of boots that looked like some poor
beggar's cast-offs.  Nothing was left of her long, beautiful hair
except stubble.

At the sound of her brother's voice her head shot up. "Thokmay!" she
cried.  "Oh, Thokmay!"

Without thinking Prince Thokmay shook off Sergeant Gyalpa's arm and
started to run. He only got a few paces before Rust butted him in the
back with her head and sent him sprawling.

He heard Ogmin scream as he rolled onto his back and looked straight
into Rust's angry eyes. She stood over him with one paw on either side
of his head. Her breath was hot and wet and foul on his face. "I said
*slowly*," she said menacingly. "I won't say it again."

Prince Thokmay gulped. The bear's jagged teeth were yellowish near
their roots, but gleaming white at the points. "I'm sorry," he said
weakly.

"Rrrmmm," the bear rumbled. She shuffled sideways so that he could get
up. "Now get up. It's time for dinner."

Somehow Prince Thokmay helped Sergeant Gyalpa slosh through the
knee-deep water to the raft. The prince scrambled up onto the raft and
embraced his sister. "Oh, Ogmin," he said, hugging her fiercely. "Are
you all right?"

"I'm sc-scared," his sister said, tears running down her cheeks as she
held him tight. "I tried not to be, but I couldn't help it."

"Sh, sh, sh," he whispered in her ear. "It's all right. It's all
right.  I'm not going to let anything happen to you." He took a
half-step back to look at her.

Ogmin dropped her eyes. "They---they cut off all my hair," she
whispered desolately. "I told them Dolly would be mad, but they did it
anyway."

The prince felt tears welling up in his own eyes, but blinked them
away.  "It's all right," he said fiercely. "You just watch---the day
after we get back to Apple Bridge, everyone will have cut their hair
just as short as yours."

"But I don't want to go back there," Princess Ogmin said. "I hate it
there. I want to go *home!*"

"So do I," Prince Thokmay whispered. He gave her another hug. "So do
I. But we can't, not just yet."

Sergeant Gyalpa cleared his throat. "Your Highness...?"

"Yes?" Prince Thokmay said, without letting go of his sister or turning
around.

The raft suddenly dipped to one side as Rust scrambled up onto it.
Princess Ogmin shrieked. Prince Thokmay stumbled, then straightened up.

"You," Rust said to Sergeant Gyalpa. "Get off."

"No," the sergeant replied flatly. "I'm staying with Their
Highnesses."

The bear snorted. "You can get off and wait for your horse to come
back, or I can knock you off. It comes to the same thing either way."

Sergeant Gyalpa's face reddened. "I will *not* leave!" he shouted.

"Do as she says, Sergeant," Prince Thokmay ordered tiredly as the bear
growled deep in her throat. "She's right---if she doesn't want you on
board, one way or another you're going to get off. That's an order,"
he added, as the sergeant took an angry breath. "When Bucket comes
back, I want you to ride for Apple Bridge and get help."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant said stiffly. He hesitated, then
saluted. "It's been a pleasure to serve you, sir." For a moment he
looked as though he wanted to say something else as well, but the
moment passed. He slid awkwardly off the raft into the river.

"Sergeant!" the bear called. Sergeant Gyalpa turned around.

"Push us back out into the current before you go," the bear ordered.

For a moment Prince Thokmay thought the sergeant was going to climb
back up on the raft and try to strangle Rust with his bare
hands. Instead, he looked up at the prince. "Your Highness?" he asked.

"Do it," Prince Thokmay told him. "And good luck getting home."

"Thank you, Your Highness." The sergeant braced his shoulder against
the raft and pushed with his good leg. The raft barely moved. Sergeant
Gyalpa took a deep breath and grunted as he shoved again. This time
the raft shifted slightly. A third push got it clear of the
brambles. It slowly gained speed as the river current began to pull it
along.  Sergeant Gyalpa stood there with the river lapping at his
thighs until the main current of the Trout caught the raft and took it
away. Then he struggled back to the bank and started calling for
Bucket.

Prince Thokmay resisted the urge to wave as the sergeant dwindled into
the distance behind them. Instead, he put his arm around his sister.
Princess Ogmin sniffled again and laid her head on her brother's
shoulder.

"Don't worry," Prince Thokmay whispered in her ear. "Sergeant Gyalpa
will get help. We'll be all right."

The raft swayed again as Rust sat down on her haunches next to the
lean-to in the middle. "There's food in there," she said, waving a paw
at the shaky-looking structure. "And blankets, if you're cold."

"Thank you, that's very kind," the prince said icily. "I suppose it
would be too much to ask for a change of clothes and a hot bath as
well?"

The bear's nose twitched. "I only planned on having the princess along
on this trip," she warned the prince. "If you don't mind your manners,
I might decide that was still the best idea."

The prince bit off an angry response. "Why don't we sit up at the
front?" he said to Princess Ogmin. "We can play 'I Spy' if you want."

"I don't want to play," she whined, but followed her brother up to the
front of the raft.

"How about I go first?" the prince said lightly. "I spy, with my
little eye, something that is---"

"Bears can swim, you know," Rust interrupted from behind them. "We can
swim pretty well. Even if you could make it to the shore ahead of me,
your sister probably couldn't."

The prince sat silently for a moment, then put his arm around his
sister again. "All right," he said. "If you don't want to play, we
don't have to."

"I'm hungry," Princess Ogmin said after a few minutes.

Prince Thokmay twisted around. "Can I get her some food?" he asked
Rust.

The bear shrugged. "Why not?" She wrinkled her nose again. "The
biscuits are in the brown bag, and the apple sauce---"

"---is in the jars," the prince finished for her. He knelt down in
front of the lean-to and pulled out the biscuit bag and two jars of
apple sauce. A pair of heavy blankets were crumpled together to make a
Ogmin-sized nest under the lean-to. A small straw doll lay beside
them.

Prince Thokmay picked up the doll. "What's this?" he asked.

The bear shifted uncomfortably. "I thought it would keep her quiet,"
she said.

"Hm." Someone had pulled a few strands of straw part-way out of the
head to give the doll some spiky hair. Prince Thokmay felt tears sting
his eyes again. He gently laid the doll back by the blankets.

He sat down cross-legged and laid some biscuits out on his
leg. "You're acting more like a nurse than a kidnapper," he observed
as he spooned some apple sauce onto the biscuits. "From what we saw of
your friend Muddh, I would have expected you to be...rougher."

A rumble came from deep in the bear's throat. For a moment Prince
Thokmay was reminded of the sound that Kulbinder made when he smelled
something that he didn't like. "He's not my friend," Rust said. "We
were just business partners, that's all."

"Business partners," the prince echoed neutrally, careful not to look
up. Mope had taught him this, as well---how to leave silences for
other people to fill.

The bear rumbled again. "He needed eyes and ears in Apple Bridge, and
someone to buy supplies for him with the money he got for the things
he brought out of the Blight. I needed the princess. It seemed like a
good exchange."

"You needed the princess," the prince repeated. "Why didn't you need
me?"

The bear snorted. "How would I have gotten you?" she asked. "Muddh's
magic was good enough to get the princess out in the middle of the
night, but it wouldn't have worked on an adult."

"She's an adult," the prince said angrily, then cut himself off.

He thought furiously as he spooned some more apple sauce. "Why did you
leave Sergeant Gyalpa behind?" he asked, handing Princess Ogmin a
biscuit. The princess made a face at it, but took it and bit into it
anyway. Prince Thokmay supposed that she had been eating a lot of
biscuits and apple sauce recently.

"Why would I bring him?" the bear replied. "Nobody cares enough about
him for him to be a good hostage."

"Bringing him along wasn't the only other option," the prince said,
swallowing a mouthful of biscuit himself. He looked over at the bear.

She studied her paws for a heartbeat. "No sense killing unless you
have to," she said. She raised her head to meet the prince's
eyes. "It's something humans would do well to learn," she added
bitterly.

The prince looked away first. "Probably," he said. "But I don't see
how kidnapping us is going to teach them." He handed his sister
another biscuit. She sat on the edge of the raft and scraped the apple
sauce off it with her finger, then licked the sticky goop off her
finger as the river bank went by.

"I don't expect it to," the bear said. "But it will teach animals that
they can fight back if they really want to. It will show them that
they don't have to live by laws that humans have made, or stay in the
cages that humans have put them in."

"I don't remember ever seeing a gifted animal in a cage," the prince
said. "Not in Gandan, anyway."

"Some cages aren't easy to see," the bear told him, settling back on
her haunches. "I've been trading in Apple Bridge for almost twenty
years, but I still have to ask for permission to set up my stall each
time I come to town. Human traders are allowed to come and go as they
please.  Every noble household in the Marches hires gifted animals,
but how many of those animals ever become nobles themselves?"

"How many of them would want to?" Prince Thokmay asked, frightened
slightly by the anger in the bear's voice. "It's not as much fun as
most people think."

"Rrrr..." Princess Ogmin jumped at the bear's angry growl and looked
at her brother fearfully. He patted her shoulder with his hand, but
didn't take his eyes away from the bear. "That's what your kind always
say," Rust sneered. "Oh, poor us, what we do is so hard, it takes so
much out of us. The world is better off just letting us run
things. Well, do you know what's hard, Your Highness?" The bear almost
spat the last two words. "What's really hard is watching your son run
through with a spear for sport, and knowing that the *humans* who did
it went off and bragged to their friends that night at dinner about
what a good day's hunting they'd had."

"If someone murdered your son, why didn't you find a judge and have
them brought to trial?" the prince asked. "Even in Garheim, they
would---"

"Because killing ungifted animals isn't murder!" the bear
snarled. "Not according to human law. It doesn't matter if their
parents are, or if their parents love them. If an animal can't speak,
it's fair game for any featherless chicken with time on his hands and
a taste for blood."

She pointed at Princess Ogmin, who had covered her ears with her
hands.  "But it would be murder if I did to her what your kind did to
my son, wouldn't it? Why is killing an ungifted animal not a crime,
but killing an ungifted human is?"

The prince gaped at her, his mind whirling. "But you can't---she's not
ungifted!" he exclaimed. "It's not the same thing!"

"Oh no?" the bear asked grimly, settling back on her haunches. "Then
why does she have a nursemaid, instead of a tutor like you do?"

"You're mad," the prince said flatly.

The bear snorted. "I live in a mad world. But I think a lot of other
animals will start to see it a little more clearly once I show them
how to look at it."

The prince's mouth had gone dry. "I don't believe you," he said
steadily. "If you were really going to murder my sister, you would
have done it by now."

"Rrrr..." Rust scratched her neck. "Shut up and eat your apple
sauce. I'm tired of talking to humans."

The prince studied her face carefully. "That's what you meant to do,
isn't it?" he said slowly. "But you couldn't. You couldn't give her a
doll to sleep with, then... then..."

"I said shut up!" the bear growled. The prince shook his head, then
turned around and put his arm back around his sister.
