---
layout: narrow
title: "The Princess and the Bear"
dedication: "For Madeleine, who is taking me on the greatest journey of my life."
author: "Greg Wilson"
permalink: /bear/
---

## Prolog

*Consider Cherne.  A diamond adrift in the heavens, it measures eight thousand
gallops from bow to stern and six thousand from port to starboard.  Its single
continent is surrounded on all sides by an ocean whose outer shore rises up to
hold the world as a child might cup a drop of water in her hand.*

*Chernese history began with the Pilots, and nearly ended with them as well.
Powerful and inhuman, their reign ended in a long war that scarred the moon,
turned Lake Karaband into a sea of glass, and littered the land with strange
magic.  When the war was over the Pilots were gone, leaving humanity and the
Gifted to carry on as best they could.*

*Now look there, where the Brumoso Mountains tumble down toward the ocean and
ninety little kingdoms squabble endlessly with their neighbors.  A small herd of
panicked clouds is fleeing west over orchards and fields.  On the back of one of
those clouds is a young woman.  She had high hopes for the day, but now all she
wants to do is survive.*

## Chapter 1: An Unexpected Meeting

The tornado roared, tearing at the trees beneath it like an angry child pulling
up handfuls of grass.  *Left! Left!* Noxy mind-shouted, squelching her own panic
so that the young cloud beneath her wouldn't sense it and panic in turn.

Cloak hesitated. *Left!* Noxy ordered as forcefully as she could.

As the cloud began to turn, Noxy heard a mighty *crack!* She hoped it was just
an apple tree being snapped in two---she had seen farmers' cottages nestled
among the orchards below before the tornado appeared.  She had seen people too,
pointing and waving at the clouds overhead and then running for cover when the
tornado attacked out of a clear blue sky.

Noxy wiped wind-blown grit from her eyes, but more immediately blew into her
face. She could barely see Rind and the others in front of her. *Faster!* she
urged.

Cloak struggled to obey.  They had been flying since before dawn, and she could
mind-hear him tiring.  *Please,* she mind-spoke.  *I know you can do it.*

Without warning a branch as thick as Noxy's leg tore through the cloud and
clubbed her shoulder. She was airborne for one sickening moment before falling
back onto Cloak.  She dug one hand into the cloud and held on as tightly as she
could.  *Down!  Down!  Down!* she mind-shouted, not realizing that she was
screaming the words as well.

The injured cloud plummeted toward the ground. Noxy glanced back, afraid the
tornado would follow, but it had stopped above a pile of wreckage that had been
a barn moments before to tear the boards apart and whirl them around. Noxy cried
out at the sight of people tumbling through the air, but it was just laundry on
a clothesline.

Cloak scraped his belly against the trees, then sagged to the ground with a
mind-spoken mewl of pain. Noxy slid down his side, gasping as she jostled her
bruised arm. The branch had torn open her gray leather coat and the heavy
quilted shirt she wore underneath it, but had only scraped her skin. Her knees
went weak as she realized how close a call she'd had.

She and Cloak had come down on a narrow dirt track through a patch of forest
that lay between two apple orchards.  The summer-green branches of the oaks and
maples around them still shook in the wind, but she and Cloak were safe, at
least for now.  She took a shaky breath.  Rind and the other cloudherds would
have seen her land.  They would come and find her once the tornado was gone.
There was nothing she could do but wait while the tornado turned the farm into
kindling and then went in search of something new to destroy.

Hooves drummed on the road behind her. Half a dozen soldiers in yellow jackets
galloped toward her on stocky ponies. She struggled to her feet with a grimace.

The lead rider reined in a few paces away. "Are you all right?" he asked,
raising the black-and-yellow battle mask that covered his face.

"We're fine," Noxy said, cradling her bruised arm. "Did you see the others?"

"They went along by west," the soldier said, pointing.  "Looks like they all got
by clear."

A second rider shouldered his horse past the first.  "Noxy?" he asked
incredulously, his voice breaking. "Is that you?"

Noxy stared at the newcomer.  How did he know her name?

The second rider raised his battle mask to reveal a young man with four parallel
scars glistening slightly against the dark skin of his left cheek.  "Noxy---what
are you doing here?"

"Thokmay?"  Noxy stared at the prince of Gandan, cloud and arm both momentarily
forgotten.  She struggled to her feet.  "How---" Before she could finish her
sentence the world spun around her and she sagged back against her cloud.

"Noxy!" The prince leaped down from his horse. With three quick strides he was
beside her. He paid no attention to Cloak edging away nervously as he helped her
sit back down on the hard-packed dirt track.

"I'm all right," Noxy protested, trying weakly to shake him off. "It's Cloak
that's been hurt." She tried to struggle back to her feet, but the prince put a
hand on her shoulder to stop her.

"Just sit a moment," he said firmly. "Jinpa!"

"Sir?" one of the soldiers answered.

"That farm we passed," the prince said, pointing back along the track. "See if
you can get help."

"Sir!"  The soldier snapped his horse's reins, only to pull up sharply when Noxy
said, "Wait!"

This time the prince didn't stop her from getting up. "The farm's gone," she
said. "The tornado tore it to pieces. I saw people running..."

The prince's jaw tightened. "Manpa!" he barked, his voice breaking again.
"You're with Jinpa. See if there are any survivors. Help them if you can. Double
time!" The two soldiers saluted and galloped away.

The prince looked back at Noxy. "Well," he said in a bemused voice.  "It's good
to see you, but what are you doing *here*?  It's a long way from Stale."

Noxy shrugged, then winced. This wasn't how she had imagined meeting the prince
again, not at all. "We were on our way to Chaghan.  Rind got a contract for some
rain there---she's the mayor now---and Apple Bridge was sort of on the way,
and..."  She shrugged again to hide her embarrassment.  She had wanted to
surprise him...

Before the prince could reply, one of soldiers called out, "Sir---above us!"
The other clouds had returned.

Rind brought her cloud down onto the road two dozen strides from Cloak and slid
off while her mount was still settling. Like Noxy, she wore her frizzy black
hair in long braids, but her leather coat was fringed with red and orange twists
of ribbon.  Her dark face was as narrow and as fierce as a mountain hawk's.

She strode over to Cloak without as much as glancing at Noxy, the prince, or the
soldiers and laid her hands on its flank.  "Sh, sh, sh," she said soothingly as
she closed her eyes to mind-speak with the injured cloud.

Thokmay caught Noxy's eye and raised his eyebrows.  Noxy shook her head
slightly---she still hadn't told anyone her secret.  The prince nodded almost
imperceptibly.

Rind gave Cloak one last reassuring pat.  "He could have been torn to shreds,"
she said flatly, rounding on Noxy. "And *you* could have been killed.  I'd never
have heard the end of *that*."

"Yes, *sra*," Noxy said, eyes downcast.

Rind glanced at Prince Thokmay and did a double take. "Oh hells," she said
blankly.  "What are you doing here?"

"That does seem to be the question of the day," the prince said mildly, his
voice cracking.  As Rind opened her mouth to reply, he continued, "We were on
our way to escort the new envoy from Chaghan into Apple Bridge when we spotted
the tornado.  I expect he'll have gone on ahead---we should get moving too in
case the tornado comes back."

Rind's eyes narrowed. "Comes back?"  She hesitated before grudgingly adding,
"Your Highness."

The prince nodded. "It's not just some monster out of the Blight. It's been
hitting homes and farms for three weeks now, all people who've been helping us
track down contrabanders."

"You think someone summoned a tornado?" Rind said incredulously.

The prince shook his head. "No.  That tornado probably spent the last thousand
years in a bottle at the bottom of Fast Lake.  Some contrabander must have
dredged it up or found it floating in the river.  It's just our bad luck
that---"

"Your Highness!" The soldiers who had gone down the road had come trotting
back. Two frightened boys in hand-me-down clothes were sitting behind Jinpa,
while an old woman rode behind Manpa.

The two boys stared wide-eyed at the pair of grounded clouds while their
grandmother told her story.  The farm, it was her son-in-law's, she'd moved in
after the children were born, and they'd been out pruning, her daughter and her
husband that is, not the boys, and they'd seen some men in the forest with a
cart, and, well, everyone knew some people had a little business now and again
that other folk shouldn't pry into, but these weren't anyone her son-in-law
recognized, and they'd talked about it and decided they ought to tell someone,
and they needed some new clothes for the boys, they were growing so fast, so
they'd gone into town that morning, and then that thing came out of nowhere, and
the boys had been so brave, but what was she going to tell her daughter and her
son-in-law about the house?  The roof was gone, and the chicken coop, and the
whole *barn*, and---

"His Majesty will pay to have it all rebuilt," the prince told her soothingly.
"But right now, my men will see you safely into Apple Bridge. You can stay there
as long as you need to."

The old woman nodded, fighting tears.  The prince turned back to Rind. "You
would be welcome in Apple Bridge as well, of course."

"Out of the question," Rind said sharply. "We've already lost half a day, and if
the tornado comes back---"

"But Cloak is hurt," Noxy interrupted, "He'll never make it to Chaghan if he
doesn't get some time to heal."

"We don't *have* time," Rind snapped.  "We have a contract, and we're already
going to be late."

"Then I'll stay here with Cloak until he's better," Noxy declared.

"Out of the question," Rind repeated, crossing her arms. "I'm not leaving one of
my riders in the middle of nowhere."

"I'm old enough to take care of myself!" Noxy said indignantly.

"Just like you took care of Cloak?" Rind shot back.

The prince cleared his throat.  "I will take responsibility for her," he said.
"She can stay at the garrison house and her cloud can use the courtyard until
they're able to catch up with you."

Rind threw up her hands. "Like mother, like daughter.  Just promise me you won't
go looking for trouble."

"I never go *looking* for trouble," Noxy muttered, but Rind was already
scrambling back onto her cloud. A few moments later she was airborne, heading
west with the rest of the herd.

The prince's carefully polite expression turned wistful as he watched the clouds
fly away. "Can your cloud make it to Apple Bridge?" he asked Noxy.

She put her hand on Cloak's flank and mind-spoke with him before nodding.  "Yes,
if we go slowly. I've been pushing him pretty hard to keep up with the others,"
she added, feeling a sudden pang of guilt. "I think that's why we couldn't get
away from the tornado like they did."

The prince handed his horse's reins to Jinpa. "Put the lady and her young men on
Bucketbreath here," he ordered. "See them safely back to town, and tell the
staff that they're to be given rooms in the garrison guest house if they can't
find something more suitable.  I will take the cloud back with Noxious."

The soldier cleared his throat. "Um, *sra*, are you sure---"

"We'll all be safer if someone is in a position to spot the tornado returning,"
the prince said crisply.

"Yes *sra*," Jinpa replied doggedly, "But---well, Sergeant Gyalpa said to be
double sure you were back along the garrison in time for the dinner tonight.
With the new envoy, sir.  What with protocol and all along by that."

The prince muttered something about protocol under his breath.  "The cloud won't
be any slower than horseback," he continued in a normal voice.  "And if I'm
late, I'll tell the good sergeant it was my fault."

"Yes *sra*," Jinpa said glumly.  He exchanged a look with Manpa that said it
wouldn't matter to the sergeant whose fault the prince said it was...

Prince Thokmay pointed at the two little boys.  "You two keep an eye out as
well," he said sternly. "If you see any sign of trouble, you tell these men
right away, all right?"

"Yes *sra*," the older one said. His brother just stared wide-eyed at the
prince, the cloud, and the big wide world he'd suddenly found himself in.

The prince pulled himself up onto Cloak behind Noxy and sat quietly as she
coaxed the injured cloud into the air. They levelled off a hundred strides above
the trees and turned toward Apple Bridge.

The soft, slightly damp feel of the cloud brought memories flooding back to the
prince. The last time he had flown had been two years ago. A lot had changed
since then, but not the exhiliration of being able to see *everything*: the
hackthorn bushes in their summer finery, the apple orchards, a trio of deer by a
stream, a farmer shading his eyes to look up at the cloud...

And there, in the distance, the Blight.  Centuries ago, the Pilots had dumped
their magical waste there, from spells gone wrong to enchanted creatures so
dangerous that even the Pilots were afraid of them.  At its center lay Fast
Lake, where a year might pass for every day in the normal world.  Around it, the
land was---strange.  Some parts were completely barren, while others were
crowded with pencil trees whose limbs swayed in time to music no human being had
ever heard.  Chaghan lay on the far side, three days' hard ride for anyone brave
enough to cut across a few outlying patches of Blighted land, or a week for
those who didn't want to risk a stray gust of tainted wind turning their eyes to
glass.

The prince jumped slightly when Noxy said, "You're pretty good at giving orders
these days."

The prince shrugged. "Thanks," he said, his voice breaking again. "But Sergeant
Gyalpa is really in charge.  You'll meet him when we get to town. And Sergeant
Dambu too---she's our magician. Mostly I just try to stay out of their way."

"Well, you sounded pretty convincing to me," Noxy said. She lowered her voice
half an octave. "You two keep an eye out."

The prince smiled and cleared his throat. "I never go *looking* for trouble,"
he said in a falsetto voice.

"I don't sound like that!" Noxy said indignantly.

The prince laughed.  "No, but it's the closest I can get."  He glanced down at
the road again and settled himself a bit more comfortably. "How's your mother?"

It was Noxy's turn to shrug. "She's all right, I guess.  She says she's happy to
be herding again."

The prince nodded. "I was surprised to hear she was no longer mayor."

"A lot of people are still angry about what happened," Noxy said, her eyes on
the horizon.  "When Rind said she was going to stand, they didn't even have to
have a vote.  *Amma* says she's glad someone else is worrying about everything,
but I think she misses it."

"I know how she feels," the prince said. "I'm glad to be out here and away from
all the fuss at court."

"Is Kulbinder here?" Noxy asked. "Your letter didn't say. It would be good to
see him again."

The prince shook his head. "He's with my brother now."

Noxy frowned. "Why? I thought he liked you."

The prince looked away. "He probably does, but Lormay's the heir now."  He
couldn't quite keep the bitterness out of his voice when he continued.  "My
father said it would make it clear to everyone that things have changed. Sending
me to Apple Bridge is part of that too. He said that since I'm never going to
rule, I have to learn how to serve."

"You didn't say anything about that in your letters," Noxy ventured hesitantly.

The corner of the prince's mouth twisted into a half-smile. "I couldn't be sure
who was going to read them."

Noxy flushed. "I never showed them to anyone!" she protested. "Not even Granna
Fee!"

"I don't mean that," the prince apologized hastily. "It's people at court I
worry about.  That's the other reason I like being here---nobody's watching
everything I do and gossipping about everything I say."

"That's horrible!" Noxy exclaimed.

The prince shrugged again. "That's politics."

They rode in silence before the prince cleared his throat.  "And what
about... you know.  You can still head-talk to clouds from far away?"

"Mind-talk," Noxy corrected automatically.  "And yes, I can still do it."  She
closed her eyes and took a slow breath.  "I can still mind-hear the cloud Rind
is riding, and the rest of the herd too.  And over there."  She pointed without
opening her eyes.  "There are some wild clouds over there somewhere."

"And you still haven't told anyone?"

Noxy shook her head.  The cloudherds had stories about people who could
mind-talk to distant clouds, or to birds, or even to other people, but none of
them had happy endings.

The prince waited another heartbeat for her to speak.  When she didn't, he
nodded.  "All right," he promised.  "Our secret."
