## Chapter N-1: The Bear's Choice

Rust and her two captives floated on in silence. The only other raft they saw
was being pulled upriver by two weary donkeys led by a girl who gave them no
more than a glance.  A man and a boy sat cross-legged on the raft, the man
whittling and the boy pushing the raft away from snags every once in a while
with a long pole.

The bear ordered Prince Thokmay and Princess Ogmin into the lean-to and then sat
in front of it and grunted a hello as the raft passed by.  From their hiding
place, the prince and princess could hear the raftsmen singing a slow, sad
song. The words floated over the river like clouds in a blue summer sky.

"Sergeant Dorbu used to sing that one," Prince Thokmay whispered in his sister's
ear. "It was so beautiful, sometimes I thought the trees were going to tear out
their roots so that they could come closer and listen."

"Did they ever?" she whispered back.

The prince smiled and shook his head. "No, they never needed to. He always sang
loudly enough for them to hear."

Rust waited until they rounded the next bend before letting the prince and
princess come out. The two humans sat down near the bow once again.  A moment
later, Princess Ogmin squeaked and grabbed her brother as the raft suddenly
lurched and began bobbing up and down.

The prince looked back to see what the bear was doing, but Rust was looking back
up the river as well. "What's happening?" he asked.

"I dunno," the bear rumbled. She sniffed at the air. "But somethin's coming.
Somethin' *bad*."

First came a rushing sound like wind blowing through leaves.  A shout turned
into a cry of panic, and Thokmay had just a moment to remember the donkey-drawn
raft before a roiling two-foot crest of water swept down the Trout toward them.
The wave was darker than the river beneath it, as if it was full of
shadows. "Hold on!" Rust roared.

The wave hit the rear of the raft with the force of a padded rhinoceros. Prince
Thokmay nearly tumbled into the river as the raft tilted forward and then
righted itself. Princess Ogmin screamed in terror. Dark water from the wave had
splashed up over the rear of the raft onto the logs and formed small pools. Even
as they watched, the pools oozed together and flowed *up* over the gunwales and
back into the river.

"Don' let it touch you!" Rust said. "It's Blighted!"

The raft was going faster now. "Up ahead!" the prince said suddenly.  "Steer for
that island!" He leaped to his feet and threw his weight against the steering
board.

The raft barely budged.  Rust lumbered over to the steering board and put her
shoulder against it. Reluctantly, the raft's course began to bend toward the
little patch of land.

"More! More!" the prince called, trying to gauge their speed and direction. "A
little more! Hold it there! Brace yourself!"

The raft crashed through the reeds on the upstream side of the island and ground
to a halt in its muddy bank. Rust stumbled but kept her footing. The prince, the
princess, and everything that wasn't tied down slid off the raft and into the
knee-high bushes that covered the island.

The dark water raced past on either side of them, tugging at the raft as they
scrambled to their feet. Rust barely had time to leap onto the island before
their little craft was pulled away.

"What's happening?" Princess Ogmin asked, frightened and bewildered.  She
started to cry.  "What's happening, May?"

The prince put his arm around her shoulder.  "Sh, sh," he soothed her.  "It's
all right, Oggie, it's all right, we're safe."  He caught the bear's eye.
"We're safe here."

"That was Blightwater," the bear rumbled.  "Somethin' musta happened to th'
dam."  She reared up on her hind legs to get a last glimpse of the raft, then
fell back on all fours and sighed. "That's the last we'll see of our food or
your blankets."

Thokmay forced a smile. "I guess we're all prisoners now."  The bear growled but
said nothing.  The prince gave his sister another squeeze.  "Come on---let's
tidy this up."

A few loose boards, some rope, the sacks they had used as pillows, and the
firepot were all they were able to salvage.  Thokmay laid the boards on top of
some bushes and piled everything else on top of them, all the while studying the
river and the bear out of the corner of his eye.  It was only thirty strides to
the bank.  He could easily swim that, but Ogmin could only dog paddle, and Rust
would easily catch them if they tried.

*If we dared,* the prince thought despondently.  The wave that had wrecked the
raft had disappeared downriver, but dark shadows still swirled hungrily in the
water around their little island.  When he broke a twig off a tree and threw it
into the river, something pulled it down with a soft *gloop*.  It didn't
resurface.  The prince exchanged looks with Rust.  Their only hope was to stay
put and wait for a passing boat or barge to rescue them.

"Look!" Princess Ogmin suddenly said, pointing upstream. "Someone's coming!"

It took the prince a moment to figure out what he was seeing. At first he
thought it was some kind of bird, but then he realized it was a man skipping or
hopping twenty yards at a time.  His heart sank as the figure came closer.  It
was Nangyal.

"What in th' hells is *he* doing here?" Rust snarled.

"Sh, be polite," Prince Thokmay told her, feeling almost giddy. "He *is* your
business partner."

Another dozen lopsided steps brought the plump spy to the little island.  "Well
hello!" Nangyal said jauntily. His jacket was torn and muddied, and there were
dark circles under his eyes. He held up a lock of Princess Ogmin's hair. "Glad
to see it still works."

"What are you doin' here?" Rust growled. "We had a deal."

"Yes we did," Nangyal nodded vigorously. He looked around. "You also had a raft,
didn't you? What happened to it?"

"What happened to the dam?" Prince Thokmay broke in. "We saw the wave..."

"Oh, the dam, the dam," Nangyal said with a wave of his hand. "I'm sure it's
still there. The river would be a *lot* more lively right now if Ramdu had
managed to bring it down. It's too bad---we worked a long time for this."

"Ramdu?" the prince said blankly. "*Sergeant* Ramdu?"

"Oh, yes, *Sergeant* Ramdu," Nangyal agreed. He sighed. "I don't suppose she could
have survived. She got that from our mother, you know. She never learned how to
give up either."

The prince's jaw dropped.  "Your---wait, you're her sister?  I mean, her brother?"

"Stow that!" Rust snarled. "Whadda you want?"

Nangyal blinked innocently. "Why, the princess, of course," he said.  "I imagine
half of Gandan is going to be looking for me shortly. I'll need a hostage to see
myself safely away.  I've been thinking about Barra Bantang," he added
reflectively.  "I've heard good things about how uninterested they are in
people's pasts."

"Do you have a raft stashed in your pocket?" the prince asked sarcastically.
"Or are you planning to steal a cloud?"

"Oh, neither."  Nangyal splatted the mud a couple of times with the toe of his
lone magic boot. "I could carry all three of you if I'd ever found the other one
of these, but as it is..." He shrugged and smiled.  "I'll just take her."

"The girl's mine!" Rust growled. "We had a bargain!"

"Yes we did," Nangyal agreed. "But you'll still have the prince. Biting his head
off will do you as much good as biting off hers."

"She's *mine!*" the bear roared.

Nangyal flicked his wrist.  A knife appeared in his hand, its magical blade
flickering like the tongue of a snake. "Now, now," he chided, "We've worked *so*
well together.  Let's not end on a sour note." He gestured at the loop of rope
Thokmay had rescued from the wreck of the raft. "Tie her up," he ordered.

To his own surprise, the prince laughed. "Not a chance."

"Tch, tch," Nangyal clucked, keeping his eyes on Rust. "If you don't, I will, and
I'll be *much* less gentle than you."

"Thokmay?" Princes Ogmin quavered. "What does he want?"

Prince Thokmay shook his head. "I said no," he repeated.  "I'm not going to put
a leash on her."

Rust made a sound deep in her throat.  Nangyal shrugged. "Well," he said to
her. "It looks like you won't be left with a hostage after all." Without warning
he lunged at the prince.

"Look out!" Thokmay shouted to his sister as the blade of the magic knife
whipped at him, stretching impossibly thin.  He dodged aside, flinging up his
arm instinctively.  The blade grazed his shoulder, and instantly his whole arm
went numb.

"Stand aside, *boy*," Nangyal hissed, his pretended good humor gone. "Stand
aside, or---"

With a roar, Rust charged at the magician.  Nangyal spun, whipping the knife
around, but Rust's weight carried her forward even as it bit into her flank.
Nangyal shrieked as the two of them fell backward into the river.  "No!" he
screamed. He struggled toward the shore. Rust roared again and knocked him
sideways with one swipe of her paw.

The Blightwater bunched up around them.  Hundreds of dark strands wrapped around
their legs like a net and pulled them down.  Nangyal screamed in terror.  With a
mighty kick, he launched himself toward the riverbank, landing with a splash in
the shallows.  As he scrambled toward shore, a tendril of Blightwater snagged
hold of his boot.  "No!" he shouted.  "It's mine, it's mine!"  But even as he
said it, he pulled his foot free.  The boot disappeared into the river.  The
magician crawled on all fours up the muddy riverbank, blubbering.

But the boot wasn't enough to satisfy the Blightwater.  Rust roared and strained
against its dark tendrils as it tried to pull her into the river.  Prince
Thokmay grabbed the coil of rope. "Hold on!" he shouted, throwing one end to
her.

The bear lunged at it and caught it in her teeth. The prince dug in his heels
and pulled as hard as he could.  He felt Princess Ogmin's arms go around his
waist. Together they leaned back, further, further.

*Crack!* The rope snapped.  Rust was instantly pulled under. The dark water
roiled for a moment, then went still.  A heartbeat later, the only sign that she
had ever been there were her footprints.

"Well, this is a bit of a mess, isn't it?"  Nangyal called from the riverbank.
He waved at them, water dripping from his torn and muddied jacket.  "But I'm
sure you'll be able to figure something out.  Best do it before dark, though,"
he added with an evil smile.  "Those things are *much* more playful at night."

Without waiting for an answer he turned and limped away.  As he watched the
magician go, Thokmay realized that he *could* kill someone, provided that
someone was Nangyal.

But just then, his sister was still crying. "Sh, sh," he said, putting his arm
around her again.  "It's all right. It's all right. It's over." He looked at the
dark water lapping higher and higher against the sides of their little patch of
mud as the sun began to sink over the horizon.  "It's over," he repeated.

The river rose a thumb's width at a time as the day turned to twilight. A ragged
shark's fin half as tall as Prince Thokmay circled the island a few times, then
headed downstream in search of more accessible prey. Something else sparkled
across the dark Blightwater like a rainshower, and a few moments later the
prince thought he saw huge clawed footprints appear and disappear on the river's
surface.

"I want to go home," Princess Ogmin whispered.

"Me too," the prince said. He took a deep breath, eyeing the riverbank once
again and wondering how you distracted a whole river. It was hopeless.  Ogmin
could manage nothing more than a dog paddle. Even if the river had been as
peaceful as the pond they had paddled in when they were little, she wouldn't
have been able to make it without his help. Hot tears of anger and frustration
welled up in his eyes.

"..our..ighness.." Prince Thokmay looked up at the sound. Could the Blightwater
talk?

"...here..." He looked wildly around, and then up.  It was Cloak, descending as
he approached. Noxy and Sergeant Gyalpa waved at him from the cloud's back.

"Over here!" he shouted. He waved his arms and laughed. "We're over here!" Ogmin
looked up and shrieked, then started waving her arms as well.

*Down!* Noxy mind-ordered the cloud. The Blightwater was still rising, faster
now as it sensed that its prey might escape it.

*Bad!* the cloud replied emphatically. *Bad!*

*Down!* Noxy ordered again as forcefully as she could, but try as she might, she
couldn't get Cloak to drop down any further.

"She won't do it!" Noxy said in despair. "She's too scared!"

"You just have to get us close enough for this," the sergeant said, uncoiling
the rope he'd brought.

Noxy made Cloak hover over the little island while the sergeant lowered the
rope. "Hurry up, Your Highness!"  he bellowed.

"Can you lift us both?" the prince shouted back. "We're a bit short on time down
here."

"Socks and biscuits," the sergeant cursed. "No!" he shouted. "But if you can
both hang on, we can get you to shore."

Prince Thokmay grabbed the free end of the rope and tied it under his sister's
armpits. "Hold on really, really tight," he told her, putting her hands on the
rope. "No matter what happens. All right?"

"All right," she said in a small voice.

He kissed her cheek. "You're very brave," he told her. "When we get back to
Apple Bridge I'll buy you all the pies you can eat, I promise." He reached up
and grabbed the rope with one hand, wrapped the other around his sister, and
shouted, "Ready!"

Sergeant Gyalpa wrapped his end of the rope behind his back and sat down on the
cloud with his legs spread. "All right," he said to Noxy.  Noxy pursed her lips
and mind-spoke a command at the cloud.

Cloak lifted slowly, then swung toward the riverbank.  "We're up!" the prince
shouted. For a moment everything seemed to be working, but then suddenly they
dropped a hand's breadth.

"I can't get a footing!" the sergeant yelled. Noxy watched in horror as his feet
slid deeper and deeper into the cloud under the weight of the prince and
princess. The rope was cutting into Cloud as well, making a deep rift that
slowly let Thokmay and Ogmin drop further and further toward the river.

"Just a few more heartbeats!" Noxy yelled. "Thokmay, hang on! Hang on!"

"Lift up your feet," Thokmay grunted at his sister. He could hear the
Blightwater chuckling below them.

"I'm scared!" Ogmin said.

"Just lift up your feet!"  Ten strides... eight... five...

His heels splashed into the river. "Run!" he shouted at his sister. A hundred
tiny tendrils tugged at his boots as he pushed her through the reeds toward the
bank. The soft mud underneath them seemed to be coming alive. They scrambled up,
grabbing bushes and branches and dandelions and anything else that offered a
handhold until they reached the top of the riverbank and flopped down.

Prince Thokmay lay there for a moment, panting, then rolled over and started
untying the knot around his sister. "Thokmay?" she asked.

"What?" he gasped as he undid the last of the knot.

"I *really* want to go home."

## Chapter N: The End of the Letter

*Your Majesty,* Thokmay began, as always. Then he paused, listening to the rain
tap against the window and wondering yet again what it would have been like to
grow up calling his father something a little less formal than that. Ogmin was
singing to herself in the next room, and he could hear Dolly's voice as well,
although he couldn't make out what she was saying.

He dipped his pen in the inkwell and continued. *1. I am writing to inform you
that my tutor has decided to leave your service to pursue opportunities
elsewhere. I have been well pleased with him, particularly during the recent
difficulties described in the reports which I trust you have by now
received. Unless I am instructed otherwise, I shall commend him to future
patrons.*

*Although I probably won't need to do so soon,* Thokmay added mentally. He had
tried to talk the troll out of leaving, but Mope had made up his mind. "I've
been trying to train you like the circus man trained my father," Mope had said,
his face even longer than usual.  "It's time I did a few of my own tricks for a
change."

"Where will you go?" Thokmay asked.

The troll twiddled his big toes. "Former or Latter Tongsa, perhaps, or
Chaghan. Or maybe even Araña. Anyone can argue the law in Araña."

"Argue the law?" "Araña?" the prince and Noxy prince asked simultaneously.

"Absolutely," Mope said earnestly. "Eloquence and logic, logic and eloquence,
that's the key. Did you know that gifted animals still aren't allowed to own
land in Former Tongsa? They can in Chaghan, but they need a human's permission
to marry. And there was a monstrous case in Garheim, Your Highness will remember
we discussed it some months ago, which concluded that---"

"Enough, enough," the prince laughed. "If anyone can talk the world into better
shape, you can." On an impulse he hugged his tutor.  "I'll miss you."

The troll hugged him back clumsily. "And I you, Your Highness," he said. "You
had a pretty good sense of humor, for a human."

The ink on Thokmay's pen had dried. He wiped it carefully on a scrap of paper
and dipped it in the inkwell again. *2. The Honored Noxious has rejoined her
companions. They are returning to the mountains for the winter, but I have given
her the freedom of the kingdom and taken the liberty of inviting her to visit
the capital whenever she might choose to do so.*

"Or something like that," the prince muttered under his breath. The other
cloudherds had flown into Apple Bridge the day before. They had been appalled by
the destruction, and Aft had been furious when she had learned of the part that
Noxy had played.

"Cloak could have been torn to shreds!" Rind raged. "And you too!  You could
have been killed!"

Noxy folded her arms and glared at the older woman. "Or half of Gandan could
have been flooded with poisonous old magic. Or Princess Ogmin could have drowned
when her raft floated away." That was the story the prince, Sergeant Gyalpa, and
Noxy had agreed on during the flight back to Apple Bridge---the princess had
been playing on a raft, and it had floated away. Mope had thanked them for
that. "Or I could have tripped over a pebble and broken my nose. Would you have
liked that more?"

Neither saw the looks on the other cloudherds' faces, but the prince did. "We
are of course grateful for Noxy's assistance in this matter," he said hastily in
his most official voice. On an impulse, he continued, "In recognition of which,
we offer her the freedom of Gandan, so that she may travel throughout the
kingdom without hindrance, and call upon His Majesty's servants for aid as she
may require." For the first time, the prince was glad that Mope had made him
practice that speech so many times, so that he could say it without stumbling.

Rind had glowered at the prince and Noxy, but the other cloudherds had clapped.
FIXME

Noxy and the prince said their real good-byes an hour later. "I'm glad you let
me stay," Noxy said, stroking Cloak's flank, somehow not able to meet the
prince's eyes.

"I'm glad too," the prince said, feeling equally awkward. He paused a moment,
then added, "Even if all of this hadn't happened, I'd be glad." He waved at her
a few moments later as Cloud climbed into the sky, breathless at how soft her
lips had been.

There was a clatter next door. "Excuse me, Your Highness," Dolly called out,
"But will Her Highness be needing her summer dresses, or may I put them in
storage?"

"Pack everything, please," Prince Thokmay replied loudly. "We won't be coming
back."

There was a moment's silence, and then the door to the prince's study slowly
creaked open. Princess Ogmin peeked around the door. She was still wearing a
dark silk scarf on her head, despite the number of times Dolly and the prince
had told her how grown-up her short hair made her look.

"Are we going home?" Ogmin asked.

"Mm hm," the prince said. He smiled at her. "We really are."

"Wheee!" Ogmin shrieked. She bounded into the room and hugged him.  "We're going
home!"

"Whoa, whoa!" he laughed, "Watch out for the inkpot!" He squeezed her tight so
that he could wipe his eyes without her seeing him do it. "But only if you help
Dolly pack, all right?"

"I'll help!" she promised. She ran out of the room. "Did you hear? Did you?" he
heard her say.

It wasn't Dolly who answered. "What's happening?" Ramdu asked uncertainly.
Prince Thokmay stared down at his letter as Princess Ogmin tried to explain. The
sergeant had been unconscious for two days after the fight at the dam. When she
had awaken, her mind had been as clear and as empty as a baby's. It had only
taken her a few days to remember how to feed herself, but her progress since
then had been slow. She seemed to remember nothing of her former life, and her
former apprentices said she probably never would.

Princess Ogmin was still in the middle of her description of the wonderful
things to eat in the capital when Ramdu interrupted. "Do you think we should
call this one Rose?" she asked. "Or Lily?"  The prince could imagine her holding
up one of Ogmin's many dolls.

"Lily," the princess said decisively. "Because her hair is so beautiful."

The prince smiled and turned back to his letter and wrote, *3. As there is no
longer an immediate threat to Apple Bridge, and as I believe your daughter would
be happier in the familiar surroundings of the capital, I am returning with her
to Gandan.* He had lain in bed most of the previous night, watching the moon
rise and then set, trying to work up the courage to write those words. For a
moment, he imagined crumpling up the letter and starting a new one.  Instead, he
took a deep breath, drew a diagonal line across the empty space on the page, and
at the bottom wrote, *Your dutiful*.

He hesitated only a moment before adding, for the first time, *and loving*, then
finished, *son, Thokmay Gandan-o Prince*. He let his breath out with a whoosh,
put his pen back in the inkwell, folded the letter, dripped some wax on it, and
pressed his signet ring into the wax to seal it. Then he leaned back in his
chair and stretched like a cat.

Years later, when his hair was starting to turn gray and the scar that the
world's last wolf had left in his arm ached in cold weather, Prince Thokmay
finally heard what had happened when his father had received that letter. "He
just smiled," the old steward said to him. "Like he used to sometimes before
your mother passed away." But there are many more stories to tell before that
one.
