## Missing!

Noxy woke to a frantic knock.  "His Highness needs you downstairs,
m'lady," the maid said, hurrying away before Noxy could answer.  She
pulled on her clothes and boots and followed.

The garrison house was in uproar. Soldiers were looking in closets and
under beds, while the servants tried frantically to remember if they
had forgotten about any secret passages.  Boots thundered on stairs,
while wooden shoes went *clack!  clack! clack!* through every room and
hallway.

Pacing back and forth in the entrance hall, the prince snarled, "She
can't have just turned into a frog and hopped away! Can she?"

"It's doubtful, Your Highness," Sergeant Dambu said, her eyes
downcast.  "Magic along by that powerful would probably have woken me.
And even if it din't, it would have given such to my apprentices as
certain."  She was standing, but only just, her face still drawn from
exhausting herself the day before.

"She loves to go down by the docks and watch the river rafts," Dolly
fretted. "She might have fallen in, or...or..."

"Now, mother, I'm sure she's all right." Mope patted her shoulder
awkwardly, even though he looked no less worried than she did.  He
glanced up as Noxy arrived, then spoke to Sergeant Dambu. "All of Her
Highness's belongings are up in her room. Can't you use them to find
out where she's been taken?"

"What makes you think somebody took her?" Prince Thokmay asked.

"Erm, well..." Mope seem flustered for an instant. "Isn't it obvious?
She's never wandered away before, certainly not in the middle of the
night. And the smugglers have grown bolder, Your Highness, you can't
argue with that, not after yesterday. I just thought---well, I just
thought..." He flapped his hands instead of finishing his sentence.

"You could be right," the prince said grimly. "Manpa! *Manpa!* Where
have you---oh, there you are. My compliments to Sergeant Gyalpa, and
he's to send squads north and south along the main road. Have them
knock on every door and ask if anyone saw any strangers last night."

"Sir, I believe he's already sent along some out, sir," the soldier
replied as he saluted.

"Well then have him send some more!"

"Sir!" The soldier saluted again and jogged away.

Prince Thokmay suddenly seemed to notice that Noxy was in her riding
clothes. "I'm glad you're awake," he said curtly. "Is Charger well
enough to fly? You might have more luck spotting her from the air."

"I'll go and look," Noxy said.

"I'll come with you," Mope volunteered. "I'm afraid I'm not much use
standing around here." He patted his mother's shoulder again. "I'm
sure she'll be all right," he said softly. "No-one would hurt her."
Dolly put her own hand on her son's and tried to smile.

Charger was already floating a few feet above the ground in his pen, his
edges bunching and clumping with agitation.  He could sense how
worried she was, Noxy realized, even without her mind-speaking to
him. "Do you really think the smugglers have kidnapped the princess?"
she asked Mope as she ran her hands over the cloud's flank to soothe
him.

"I can't say that I know," Mope replied. He tugged his lower lip for a
moment, then put his hands back down at his sides in embarrassment
when he noticed Noxy watching him. "They might have done, they might
have done. Oh, I hope she's all right. My mother would---well, it
would be terrible, that's all."

Noxy patted Charger's flank again.  Years ago, her mother had shown her
that if you looked straight at something in the dark, you probably
wouldn't see it, but if you looked away, it would show up in the
corner of your eye.  Whatever strange ability she had seemed to work
something like that.  If she tried to feel Charger's injury, nothing
happened.  If she let her mind wander, she could---it was almost like
stubbing her toe against it.

She frowned and shook her head.  There would be time to explore what
she could do later.  "He's still not completely healed," she told
Mope, "But he can take us up as long as we don't push him too
hard. Come on!" She grabbed a double handful of cloud and levered
herself up onto Charger's back.

"Um..." Mope hesitated.

Noxy lay down flat and stretched out her arm. "Hurry up!"

The orangutan hesitated a moment longer, then sighed and took the
offered hand and clambered to sit beside Noxy. He swallowed loudly as
Charger began to rise.

"Keep your eyes peeled," Noxy told him. "No, closer to the edge. Don't
worry, Charger won't let you fall."

They cleared the rooftops a moment later.  "Do you see anything?" she
asked.

"Only the insides of my eyelids," the orangutan told her. Taking a
deep breath, he opeed his eyes and looked down. "What am I supposed to
be looking for?"

"Anything," Noxy said. "Anything at all."

They flew in a slow circle over Apple Bridge, scanning the town below
for some sign of the missing princess. She wished she had the eagle
eye that Ulfmaerr had given her grandmother. The old magician had
claimed it wasn't magic, but when Noxy had looked through the polished
brass tube, with its twin pieces of curved glass, she had been able to
count the leaves on trees on the other side of the valley.

"Look!" Mope said excitedly. "Over there!"

Noxy tried to follow his pointing finger. "Where? What do you see?"

"Those soldiers---they've got someone with them! And they're heading
straight for the house. They must have found something!" Sure enough,
two uniformed soldiers were hurrying back to the garrison house with a
third man on a stocky pony between them.

Noxy leaped nimbly off Charger as they touched down and raced across the
courtyard without waiting for Mope to dismount.

"What's happened?" the prince demanded. "Did you find her?"

"No, but someone's coming up the road," Noxy said breathlessly.  A
heartbeat later the door banged open. Sergeant Gyalpa strode in with
two soldiers and a middle-aged man with long, greasy hair behind him.

"Your Highness," Sergeant Gyalpa saluted. "This is Dobchang. He says
he saw a bear pulling a wagon out of town after moonfall last night."

"That's right, Your Highness," the man said, nodding vigorously. "It
was huge, it was, almost as big along as the wagon."

"Did you see who was in the wagon?" the prince demanded.

"Just a fellow from along around the market," Dobchang said
helplessly. "I don't know his name, but I been see him often
enough. Skinny as a rake, he is."

"That's Muddh!" Noxy exclaimed. "He was in the market!  He gave the
princess some ribbon---"

"---and a ring," the prince finished. He thumped a fist on the
wall. "He even *told* us it was magical!"

"Now, a moment, Your Highness, a moment," Mope cautioned. "You're
letting feeling run ahead of logic. What did we study last---"

"This is not a time for lessons!" the prince snapped. He glared at the
troll for a moment, then unclenched his fists and said, "I'm sorry.  I
shouldn't have yelled. What were you going to say?"

"I was just going to say that we don't actually know whether this pair
has anything to do with your sister's disappearance," Mope replied
quietly. "Perhaps they wanted to be on the morning ferry at Two Pear
Crossing.  Or wanted to, um, to circumvent the gate inspection traders
are usually subject to?  It could mean nothing."

Everyone was silent. "I'm---I'm sorry for bringing you bad news, Your
Highness," Dobchang finally said awkwardly.

The prince shook his head. "No, you've been very helpful. The sergeant
here will see to it that you are rewarded."

The man drew himself up. "There's no need for that, Your Highness.
Helping you out, that's reward enough."

The prince nodded slowly. "Very well. But I hope you'll accept my
gratitude." He held out his hand.  Dobchang hesitated, then shook it.

As one of the soldiers showed him out, a smile twitched at the corner
of the prince's mouth. "Back in the capital, he'd spend the rest of
his life telling everyone a prince shook his hand," he said to Noxy.
"Around here, he'll spend the rest of his life telling everyone how it
wasn't such a big deal."

"Excuse me, Your Highness," Sergeant Dambu interrupted, "But you said
that the man in the market gave Her Highness a ribbon."

"Yes, a blue one," the prince confirmed bitterly. "I thought he was
just trying to earn some royal favor."

"Do you still have it?" Sergeant Dambu asked.

The prince raised his eyebrows at Dolly. "I think so," she said. "Yes,
I'm sure of it, it's upstairs on the princess's dresser."

"If it could be brought down, I might be able to use it to find the
princess," Sergeant Dambu said. Noxy could hear the reluctance in the
magician's voice.

Dolly didn't need any more urging. As she trotted up the stairs the
sergeant called out, "And if Highness's hair brush could be brought
down as well, it might also be useful." She turned to one of the
soldiers standing beside her. "Jinpa, see if you can find my
apprentices. Have them meet me in the front courtyard in ten minutes."
With a slight bow of her head to the prince, she added, "If you will
excuse me, Your Highness? I need some time to prepare."

"Of course," the prince said. "Thank you."

As she walked away, Sergeant Gyalpa observed gruffly, "Finding Her
Highness could take a lot out of her."

"Magic always does," the prince replied, staring down the hallway at
Sergeant Dambu's back.

Ten minutes later a dozen or more people stood by the water trough in
the front courtyard of the garrison house. Some of the soldiers had
put on their armor, as if they expected an invasion. Noxy spotted one
with a coil of rope slung across his chest like a sash.

Sergeant Dambu's two apprentices, both newly-recruited soldiers from
Apple Bridge, watched her nervously as she took the rolled-up ribbon
from Dolly and set it on a small piece of wood. "You have to be
careful to put the fresh-cut end on the inside," the sergeant said,
whether to the apprentices or herself Noxy couldn't tell. "It's easy
to forget that, but if you do, the spell works backwards, and tells
you where the thing you're looking for *isn't*."

She put the block of wood in the water, then waited until it stopped
bobbing up and down. Once it settled, she unwound a few strands of
hair from Princess Ogmin's hair brush and put them on another block of
wood.  "Make sure nothing dangles," she said. "See? Nothing in the
water to mix everything up." This block went in at the trough's other
end.

"Now..." Sergeant Dambu took a deep breath, then let it out with a
whoosh. The two blocks suddenly started speeding toward each other,
moving so quickly that they each raised a small wake. They met in the
middle of the trough with a *click!*

Sergeant Dambu nodded. "She's with whoever has that roll of ribbon,"
she said.

"Can you tell us where that is?" the prince asked, trying to keep his
voice level.

Sergeant Dambu nodded. "The green box," she said to one of her
apprentices. "We'll try the easy way first."

The apprentice opened the box. Inside, a dozen ordinary-looking stones
lay in a tray, each with a neat hand-written label pasted beside
it. The apprentice set the stones one by one on the edge of the
trough, spacing them out as evenly as he could. As he did so, Sergeant
Dambu took out the block with Ogmin's hair on it and handed it to her
other apprentice.

"But---" The other apprentice looked confused. "Won't it be more
accurate to look for Her Highness, rather than the ribbon?"

"I think I know what I'm doing," Sergeant Dambu told her. "Of course,
if you'd like to repeat the test the other way yourself..."

The apprentice swallowed. "No thank you, ma'am," she said. She stepped
away from the trough.

"Ready here, ma'am," the first apprentice said. Sergeant Dambu nodded
her head, then took another deep breath.

Nothing happened, and then nothing, and then the block of wood started
moving toward one side of the trough. When it hesitated, Sergeant
Dambu said, "Take away the middle stone. No, not that one, the
*middle* one, to your left!"

As soon as the apprentice did so, the block of wood nosed toward a
flat, blue-gray piece of slate. When it bumped against the side of the
trough, the sergeant's shoulders slumped. "That's it," she said
hoarsely. "What does the label say?"

"The west side of Carmick Hill, ma'am," the apprentice replied. His
eyes widened. "She's in the Blight!"

Dolly and Noxy gasped. Sergeant Gyalpa closed his eyes, then opened
them again. "Don't worry, Your Highness," he said. "We'll find her."

"That's right," the prince said distantly, his eyes on Sergeant Dambu.
"We'll find her." He blinked suddenly, then nodded. "And we'll find
who took her. Sergeant, I want every soldier you have on a horse in
fifteen minutes. Full armor, and overnight packs. Manpa! Manpa,
where---there you are. Lay out my armor, and see whether we have any
recent maps of that part of the Blight."

As Sergeant Gyalpa and the other soldiers hurried away, the prince
turned back to Sergeant Dambu. "Thank you," he said. "I hope... I hope
it didn't take too much."

The sergeant sighed. "Do you remember your tenth birthday party?" she
asked. Before the prince could answer, she added, "I don't, not any
more." She straightened up, but didn't raise her eyes. "With your
permission, Your Highness, I'd like to go and rest for a while. I
think my apprentices know enough field magic to take care of whatever
you might need."

"Of course," the prince said. "Take all the time you need."

## I Know the Bear

Noxy watched Prince Thokmay and the soldiers ride away with an empty
feeling in her stomach, as if the bottom of the world had dropped
away.  Unable to think of anything better to do, she went back in the
house and up the stairs to Princess Ogmin's room. She told herself
that she was going to see whether she could cheer Dolly up. If she had
been a few years younger or older, she would have known that she was
really looking for some cheer herself.

As she walked down the polished wooden floor toward the princess's
room, she heard muffled voices ahead. She slowed down. One of them was
Mope's, and the other was Dolly's. She hesitated. The door wasn't
actually closed, not all the way, she told herself. It wouldn't really
be eavesdropping...

"---ighness what you know. If you don't, I will!" she heard Dolly say
angrily. "Who knows what she could do to the princess?"

"Nothing half as bad as what *they'll* do to *her* if they even
suspect that she has something to do with Her Highness's
disappearance," Mope replied. "You know how people around here treat
us, what they think of us. She could have nothing to do with this, and
they'd still hunt her down like an animal."

"The prince would never do something like that," Dolly said firmly.

"What about Dambu?" Mope asked. "She'd do it without a second
thought!"

They both froze as Noxy pushed the door open. Mope's rubbery lips were
pulled back in a snarl, exposing more strong, yellow teeth than Noxy
would have imagined he could have. Dolly's face was no happier.

"I wouldn't," she said firmly. "Whatever it is, I wouldn't do it. So
why don't you tell me what's going on?"

"And don't say, 'Tell you what?'," Noxy warned him as he started to
speak.

Mope hesitated. "If you don't tell her, I will," Dolly said, as if
Mope was a badly-behaved child.

The younger orangutan sighed. "I know the bear," he said reluctantly.
"The one from the market, Rust---I recognized her from mother's
description. She's---she's involved in politics. Just like me," he
added, as if daring Noxy to laugh or criticize.

"What kind of politics?" Noxy asked.

"The right kind," Mope said.

"The *noisy* kind," his mother said at the same instant.

Mope sighed. "You'd be noisy too if someone was using my hide for a
rug," he told his mother. "At least, I hope you would." Dolly just
sniffed.

"Rust had a son," Mope said to Noxy. "An ungifted son, just a plain,
ordinary bear cub. Some hunters found him in the woods one day. She
tried to take them to court afterward, but killing an animal isn't
murder."

"So she---she had them tried for *theft*," he continued, with so much
raw bitterness in his voice that Noxy was afraid of him, "But they
wouldn't even give her that. Gifted animals aren't allowed to own
other animals in Gandan."

"Was---was Princess Ogmin one of the hunters?" Noxy asked.

"What? Oh, no, no, Her Highness wouldn't hurt a fly," Mope said
dismissively. "But the king makes the laws in Gandan, and I'm
afraid..."

He paused. "You understand I want the same things as Rust, don't you?"
he asked. "The same things that you, and every other human, has from
birth. I want to be able to run a shop without having a human sign a
license saying that I'm not rabid. I want to be able to buy books
without the bookseller having to check that they're not the banned
list---oh yes, there are still books animals aren't supposed to be
allowed to read," he snorted, seeing the look on Noxy's face. "They
might give us *ideas*."

He picked at a piece of lint on his jacket. "And most of all," he
said, not looking up, "We want our families to be safe, even if
they're not gifted." He glanced up at her. "Does that sound like so
much to ask?"

Noxy didn't know how to answer, so instead she asked, "But what has
all of this got to do with the bear? And the princess?"

Mope shrugged. "I've heard Rust speak at meetings sometimes, the kind
of meetings that humans aren't invited to. She thinks that the only
way to fix the world is to shake it up a bit, and hope that when the
pieces fall into place, they'll fit a bit better than they do right
now. As long as the king is the only one who can change the law, the
only way to change the law is to get the king's attention."

Noxy's eyes had gone wide. "You have to tell Thokmay," she
gasped. "Mope, why haven't you told Thokmay? You're talking about his
*sister*!"

"I'm also talking about the life of every gifted animal in Gandan!"
he snapped back. "Do you have any idea what will happen to us if
people think that a bear has kidnapped a member of the royal family?
Do you?  We'll all be turned into rugs, or roasted for some fat
farmer's dinner."

"Oh, don't be ridiculous," Noxy said. "Just because one bear was---"

"One?" Mope snapped again. "You think it only happened once? My father
worked in a circus. He and my mother did tricks together in towns like
this. When I was born gifted, the circus trainer tried to cut my vocal
cords, so that no-one would know I was gifted. My father stopped
him. He threw himself at that, that piece of trash, and he stopped
him, but he was beaten so badly that he died. The trainer was never
punished, of course. It was just my mother's word against his, and he
was *human*."

When he looked up at Noxy, she backed away involuntarily from the old
hurt and anger in his eyes. "That's why I taught myself everything
there is to know about the law," Mope finished quietly. Dolly had put
her arm around her son, and for once he didn't push it away. "That's
why I'm trying to teach the prince. Even if he'll never be king, he'll
be important. They'll have to listen to him."

Noxy looked away to give Mope a moment to control the tears that were
trying to escape him. A few motes of dust sparkled in the sunlight
that streamed in through Dolly's bedroom window. A small drawing of
the royal family, the kind of thing that street artists turned out by
the dozens on festival days, was in a small frame on the dresser,
beside a cracked old leather cap and a wide-toothed wooden comb with
mother-of-pearl inlay in the handle. She could hear morning birds
whistling at each other outside, and she wished more than anything
that she was back in Stale.

Finally Dolly said wearily, "Mope, we *have* to tell Sergeant Dambu
about Rust. There's no-one else left."

"If she believes us, and I said 'if', she'll have every animal in
Apple Bridge down in the dungeon by nightfall," Mope replied, just as
wearily.  "And you mark my words, half of them will never come out
again."

"Dear, Apple Bridge doesn't have a dungeon," his mother said gently.

"Well then she'll put us on rafts in the middle of the river! Or the
stables! That would probably appeal to her." Mope flapped his hands.
"Whatever she does, it will be very, very bad."

"What if we could prove that it wasn't Rust?" Noxy asked suddenly.

"What do you mean?" Dolly asked.

"Well, if everyone thinks the bear took the princess, but she didn't,
then they'll all be looking in the wrong place. If we can *prove* she
didn't take Princess Ogmin, then we'd still be helping to find the
princess."

"Hmm," Mope mused, pursing his lips. "We would at that, wouldn't we?"
He looked at Noxy shrewdly. "Of course, we'd be doing exactly the same
things we would do if we were trying to prove that Rust *did* kidnap
Her Highness."

"Mm hm," Noxy conceded, "But if it *is* Rust, and if we can find the
princess before anyone else does, then if we get her back, it'll all
come out even---an animal took her, but an animal brought her back."

"In my experience, people rarely do their moral bookkeeping that
carefully," Mope said sourly, but then he nodded his head. "All right.
We'll try to find out if Rust *didn't* take Princess Ogmin." He
glanced at his mother. "That is, if it's all right with you."

"Of course," Dolly said. "I just want to find her. She must be
terrified."

## Comes Big Song

Mope and Noxy walked down the main street to the Dog Market, asking at
every shop they passed about the bear Rust. Even when Mope asked the
questions, many of the shopkeepers gave their answers to Noxy. After
that had happened a few times, Mope started letting Noxy do all the
talking. He just stood behind her quietly, then followed her back out
again.

The baker who had sold them beaver tails the day before scowled when
they asked. "A bear? Mm, I remember one down in the market, selling
knick knacks and all. Haven't seen it today, though." He raised his
voice. "Oy, Jokhang! You seen that bear around today? That big old
scruffy one from down the market, with the wagon."

"Can't say I have," Jokhang puffed. He had tied two dozens bricks
together with twine to make a block, and then put two wide cloth
straps around it so that he could carry it like a backpack. He set the
whole thing down with a groan, and wiped his brow. "Why, is that who
took the princess?"

"We just think she might have seen something on the road," Noxy said
quickly. "Since she left last night, I mean."

"Mm, well, I wish I could help," the brickmason said regretfully. "She
was a real smile, she was." Noxy couldn't help but notice how he said
'was' instead of 'is'.

They split up when they reached the market itself. Noxy spoke with the
stern-faced leek woman, who was in her usual place by the
stairs. "Nope, but good riddance," was all she said when Noxy asked
her if she knew where Rust might have gone.

Piqaluujaq clucked his tongue when she asked him. "She is not go here
this day," the Anuat trader said. "The sun, today, and she is gone."

"You mean she left last night?" Noxy asked. Piqaluujaq shrugged. He
glanced around to see if anyone was looking, then reached into the
middle of one of his piles of seal skins and pulled out a small wooden
hoop, crisscrossed with thin leather cords. Bits of red thread were
tied around the cords wherever they crossed. A dark red feather, and
an old piece of bone, dangled on loops of cord from the hoop's bottom.

"My grandmother between days sings with Edward," he confided. "Old,
old song, from sun magic days."

Noxy shook her head in confusion. "I don't understand. Is your
grandmother here? Did she see Edward's ghost?"

The Anuat clucked his tongue again and held out the wooden hoop. "My
grandmother," he explained, pointing at the piece of bone dangling
from it.

Noxy's eyes went wide. "That's...those are from you grandmother?"

"Between days," Piqaluujaq confirmed, nodding. "She sings with Edward.
Between the sun, someone else sings, from where goes away dogs. From
all bent, the land."

Noxy still didn't understand, but then suddenly she did, and her
stomach went cold. "From the Blight?" Noxy gasped. "Someone was using
Blight magic last night? Mope! Mope!"

"Coming!" the orangutan called from two lanes away. Noxy heard a
chicken squawk as the orangutan trod on it. "What have you found?"

She grabbed his arm excitedly. "He says there was Blighted magic here
last night," she hissed, nodding her head at Piqaluujaq. The Anuat
trader had tucked his hoop back out of sight, but he grimaced at
Noxy's words. "His grandmother told him."

Mope looked around. "Is she still here?" he asked. "If someone has
brought something here out of the Blight we should report it, even if
it has nothing to do with Princess Ogmin's disappearance."

"Um, no, I think she's gone now," Noxy said hastily. "But---"

Suddenly Piqaluujaq grunted and winced.

"What's wrong?" Noxy asked. "Are you all right?"

Piqaluujaq looked up at the sky. "Comes big song," he gasped. "Big
angry song. Comes *now!*"

Just as he said it, Noxy heard something crash in the distance. People
looked up, startled or annoyed or afraid, as the town bell started to
ring, *dong, dong, dong, dong*.

"What's happening? What can you see?" Mope demanded, hopping up and
down.

"Nothing," Noxy said, standing on tip-toes. "I can't see anything at
all." All around them traders were hastily packing away their more
precious goods, or throwing cloths or nets over their stalls and tying
them down.

"Well, something must be wrong," Mope fretted. "They wouldn't ring the
bell otherwise. We should go back to the garrison house."

They pushed their way through the crowd. The normal buzz and stir of
the market had been replaced by shouts and frantic haste. Someone
stepped on Noxy's foot. Someone else pushed her hard from behind, and
then a two-wheeled cart strung with ropes of sausages was in her
way. She ducked under its handles, ignoring the curses of the
heavy-set man who was pushing it. Mope scrambled through after her.

"I spoke with some raccoons who do repairs for the rafters' guild,"
Mope puffed as they dodged around braying donkeys and worried
traders. "They didn't want to talk at first, but the younger one
finally admitted that Rust bought a raft from them a couple of days
ago, before you arrived in town. She had them leave it tied up by the
old fishing weir, about an hour's walk downstream." He grabbed Noxy's
arm and tugged. "Come on over this way, it'll be quicker. Anyway,
guess what else they sold her?"

"What?" Noxy asked. Someone shoved someone in front of them. A moment
later a neat pyramid of jars of apple preserve turned into a
sharp-toothed porridge of broken glass and apple sauce on the
cobblestones. Noxy skipped over it, then paused a heartbeat for Mope
to catch up.

"Blankets," Mope puffed. "And biscuits, and apple sauce."

"I don't understand," Noxy said. They had slowed to a walk so that
Mope could catch his breath. The orangutan stopped completely,
wheezing.

"What, would, a, bear, do, with, blankets?" he gasped. "And how, would
she, open, jars?"

Whatever Noxy might have said next was cut off by a long, mournful
howl. It seemed to come from everywhere at once, echoing around them
like a mountain gale. Noxy clapped her hands over her ears and looked
up. There, standing on top of his own statue, was the ghost of Edward
the Dog. It was so solid that the building behind it was only visible
as a dark shadow across its chest.

"ARRRROOOOOOOOOOOO!!!" it howled again, and then someone cried out,
"Up there! Look! It's the tornado! It's coming straight for town!"

"Big angry song," Noxy whispered to herself. She grabbed Mope by the
arm. "Come on! We have to get to the garrison house before it hits!"

They didn't make it. Freed of Muddh's magical control, free at last
from any kind of control at all, the tornado swept down on Apple
Bridge like an angry bull. Noxy heard a crash that went on and on as
the tornado tore shingles off of the roofs of houses and threw them
into the air like pieces of straw. As it whirled up the main road,
Jokhang's new window shattered, the shards of glass transformed into
thousands of flying knives.

"Down here!" Mope shouted. He pulled Noxy into a side alley, then
under a set of stairs. "Hold on!"

Noxy had heard bull clouds thunder at each other, and whole fields of
snow fall in avalanches down the sides of mountains, but nothing as
loud or as furious as the tornado. It lifted the logs from the main
street and used them to batter down the walls of the nearby shops. It
pulled at the statue of Edward the Dog, but when it found that the
statue couldn't be lifted from its column, it battered it with a
wheelbarrow full of bricks until statue and column alike were rubble.

It took the tornado only a heartbeat to reduce the stalls and wagons
in the dog market to kindling. It smashed pots and scattered
carefully-stacked boxes of herbs. It hopped over the wall and danced
on the river, flipping over rafts one by one. The muck and water it
flung into the air fell back on Apple Bridge as muddy rain.

"Where are you going?" Mope cried as Noxy wriggled out from under the
stairs.

"I have to get to Charger!" Noxy shouted. She could barely make herself
heard over the tornado's horrific roaring. "She'll be terrified!"

"But you can't go out in this!" Mope grabbed her ankle and tried to
pull her back under the stairs.

"Let go!" Noxy shouted, kicking at his hand. "I have to get to Charger!"
She twisted around, then slipped her foot out of her boot and
scrambled away before Mope could grab her again.

She was nearly knocked off her feet by the wind despite the shelter of
the narrow alley. She grabbed a nearby wall to steady herself, then
half-stumbled, half-flew down the alley away from the main street.
Behind her she heard Mope shouting, "Noxy, come back! Come back!"  but
she bowed her head and pressed on.

She had almost made it to the alley's other end when the tornado grew
tired of playing in the river and swept back across town toward the
garrison house. She suddenly felt as if she was caught in the current
of a fierce mountain stream. It pulled her forward, faster and faster.

Noxy screamed as she felt herself being lifted into the air. She
stumbled forward a few more steps, then threw her arms around the
railing of the last set of stairs in the alley. The wooden posts shook
in her hands. She could see the railing start to pull free, pulled
sideways further and further by her weight and the fierce wind. She
fell on her knees and tried to hug it, but the wind pulled her feet
out from under her. Something long and heavy, a door or a table,
tumbled past her end over end, like an axe thrown by a giant.

She just had time to think that she would finally find out what it was
like to fly when a big, hairy hand fastened onto her collar. "Don't
let go!" Mope shouted in her ear. The orangutan grabbed the stairs
with his other hand and both his feet. "Whatever you do, *don't let
go!*"

Something fluttered over them like a bird, then crashed to the ground
in the middle of the parade courtyard. "There goes someone's laundry!"
Mope shouted. "And look---there's Sergeant Dambu!"

Noxy turned her head, scraping her cheek against the railing post. Up
above the exit from the alley, she could see that Sergeant Dambu had
somehow climbed onto the roof of the middle wing of the garrison
house.  As Noxy watched, the sergeant stood up and raised her arms.

"Come on, come on," Mope pleaded in Noxy's ear. "Give it all you've
got!"

The sergeant brought her hands together as if she were clapping. A
sharp *crack!* cut through the sound of the tornado's winds. Noxy saw
the tornado jerk as if it had been bitten. It leaped over a house and
swept its tail at Sergeant Dambu.

The sergeant reached up and grabbed the air in front of her, as if she
was wrestling with an invisible opponent. Something pushed her back a
step, and another. Noxy could see the tornado straining to reach her,
held back as if by the invisible hands of a giant. Then Sergeant Dambu
twisted and spun around, whirling her arms in a wrestling throw.

The tornado howled as it flew threw the air, tumbling end over end.
Sergeant Dambu straightened up, raised her arms, and clapped again.
*Crack!* The tornado doubled over.

Sergeant Dambu raised her clasped hands over her head, bracing her
legs like a sailor in a rough sea. She spread her arms wide once more,
then brought her hands together for the third time.

*CRACK! BOOM!* Lightning flashed, and Noxy screamed. The dazzle
blinded her, and the air suddenly tasted like metal.

It took her a moment to realize that the wind was gone, even though
the sound of it still roared in her ears. Mope had to say her name
three times before she heard it.

"Yes, I'm all right," she told him. She suddenly realized that her
arms and back were aching from holding onto the stair railing. As the
orangutan let go of her she scrambled to her feet.

Splintered boards and branches, broken glass and gobs of mud... The
garrison house's parade courtyard was covered with the remains of the
tornado's makeshift toys. Noxy stared at the destruction for a moment,
then tried to shake free of Mope's grasp. "Let me go!" she
protested. "I have to find Charger!"

"Never mind your cloud," the orangutan said. "Where's Sergeant Dambu?"
The magician could no longer be seen on the roof of the old house.

Noxy and Mope limped across the parade courtyard. They were almost at
the door when it flew open and Dolly came running out. She threw her
arms around her son, weeping.

"I'm all right, mother, I'm all right," he said gently. He patted her
back awkwardly for a moment, then reached up and disentangled her
arms.  "Are you?"

"I'm---I'm fine," his mother said. "I just---I thought---"

"I'm fine," Mope repeated. "So is Noxy. But we have to find out what
happened to the sergeant."

"And I have to find out what's happened to Charger!" Noxy said. She
limped as fast as she could toward the door. She was still a few yards
away when a soldier she half-recognized stepped through and blinked in
the afternoon light.

"Are you all right?" he asked. He took Noxy by the shoulders as she
tried to step past him. "Here, let me look at you."

"I'm fine," Noxy said, pushing his hands away. "I have to talk to my
cloud!"

"Do you know what happened to Sergeant Dambu?" Mope asked from behind
her.

The soldier looked grim. "She's collapsed," he told them. "That spell,
whatever it was she did...she just fell down. A couple of the men
carried her to her room. The doctor's with her there now."

Mope hesitated for a moment. "Go see to your cloud," he told Noxy.
"Mother and I will see if there's anything we can do for the
sergeant."

Noxy limped through the house and out into the rear courtyard.
"Charger!" she cried, aloud and with her mind at the same time.

Charger was huddled in a corner. Noxy didn't have to mind-listen to know
how terrified the young cloud was. She stumbled over the rubble that
had fallen into the courtyard and wrapped her arms around a tuft of
the cloud.

"I'm sorry," she whispered, tears stinging her eyes as she stroked the
quivering cloud's flank. "I'm sorry, I should have been here. Are you
all right? Hm? Are you all right?"

"Bad cruel tearing roaring," the cloud whimpered in her head. She
nodded.

"I know," she said. "I'm sorry. I'm sorry. It's gone now."

The last of the sunlight had faded by the time she went back in the
house. She found Mope in the kitchen, sweeping up broken glass with
the cook and two of her assistants.

"How is Sergeant Dambu?" Noxy asked.

Mope didn't look up. "Well enough to not want my company, or my
mother's," he said shortly. He looked up at Noxy with hurt in his
eyes. "But she'll be all right."

"Sergeant! Sergeant!" A soldier came running in from the back alley.
"You two, where's the sergeant?"

"She's upstairs---no, wait, don't go up," Mope said. "She's still
exhausted. What's wrong? What's happened?"

"The old barrel house," the soldier panted. "Down by the dock. The
wall's caved in. There's people inside, we can hear them!"

Mope turned to Noxy. "You go upstairs and tell Sergeant Dambu what we
discovered," he ordered crisply. "And you, take me to the warehouse!"

## The Other Side of the Mirror

Noxy took the stairs two at a time, but slowed to a walk as she got
closer to Sergeant Dambu's door. She knocked hesitantly, then pushed
the door open.

The room she stepped into was as large as her own, but seemed smaller.
Half a dozen old pieces of furniture had been pushed against one wall
and covered with sheets. A narrow cot lay under the window, next to a
plain wooden desk and stool. The only decorations were a framed sketch
of a run-down old farmhouse, and an oval mirror taller than Noxy
hanging on the wall opposite the bed. A gentle breeze blew in past the
open shutters on the room's single large window.

"Sergeant Dambu?" Noxy asked the empty air, even though she could see
no-one was present.

"Noxy?" The cloudherd jumped and whirled around at the sound of a
voice behind her.

"Oh, I'm sorry, dear," Dolly said, patting her arm distractedly. "I
didn't mean to startle you." The old orangutan looked around the room
curiously, just as Noxy had done a few moments before.

"It's all right," Noxy replied a bit shakily. "Have you seen Sergeant
Dambu?"

"No, I haven't. The soldiers downstairs said you'd come up to look for
her."

"I wonder where she's gone?" Noxy asked, puzzled. "She must have been
completely exhausted by that spell she cast. But guess what Mope and I
found out?" she added excitedly, suddenly remembering why she had come
upstairs. "That bear, Rust---she bought blankets and biscuits and
other stuff in the market a couple of days ago, and got a raft from
some raccoons. Mope thinks it must have been to take Princess Ogmin
down the river!"

"Downriver?" Dolly gasped. "But---but then she could be anywhere by
now!"

Noxy felt awful as she saw tears well up in Dolly's eyes. She closed
her eyes and mind-listened for a moment, then grabbed Dolly's
shoulders in her hands. "Listen," she said urgently. "We can take
Charger. She's still not well, but if the tornado really is gone, and if
we go slowly, it ought to be all right. Clouds heal pretty quickly,
you know, especially young ones. Even if Rust has the fastest raft on
the river, we ought to be able to catch up in an hour or two."

Dolly stood absolutely still for a moment. When she spoke, the tone of
her voice reminded Noxy of Sergeant Gyalpa. "All right," she said.
"I'll get some clothes for her, and some proper food."

"I'll wait here and tell Sergeant Dambu," Noxy nodded. The orangutan
hurried away.

Noxy took a deep breath. Charger was feeling stronger---Noxy hadn't lied
about that---and she really was a quick healer, but the injured cloud
wouldn't be back to her full strength for at least another day. She
could imagine what Grappa Diego or Aft would say if they ever found
out...

She was still worrying about it when the oval mirror next to Sergeant
Dambu's cot went *bloop* and began to ripple, like a pond that someone
had just thrown a pebble into. For one wild second Noxy was sure that
she was dreaming, that the whole day must have been just a dream.
Without thinking she took a step forward. "Ouch!" she whimpered as she
banged her shin against one of the old dressers standing next to the
wall. She lost her balance stumbled down onto one knee.

Just as she did so, the mirror went *bloop* again. Muddh toppled out
into the room and collapsed in a heap on the floor, a small leather
backpack clutched in one hand.

Noxy's body reacted before her mind had a chance to get in the way.
She ducked under the sheet that was draped over the dresser she had
just banged her shin against and flattened herself on the dusty wooden
floor.

She lay there, afraid to move, afraid even to breathe, until she heard
the skinny smuggler groan and get to his feet. "Dambu?" he whispered
loudly. "Dambu, girl, where are you? Eh?"

Noxy saw the smuggler's feet under the edge of the sheet as he tiptoed
past the her to the door. The door's hinges creaked slightly as he
pulled it closed. As he walked back toward the mirror, Noxy noticed
that his boots didn't match. One was dirty brown, and worn down at the
heel, while the other had a delicate pattern of copper buttons
stitched around the sole, and looked like it had just been
polished. *I can guess where you came from,* she thought.

Sergeant Dambu's cot creaked as the smuggler sat down on it. Noxy's
mind raced. Dolly would be back any moment. If she found Muddh, the
smuggler would have to---

The door creaked open. "Ah, finally!" Muddh said. Noxy heard him get
to his feet. "I was just wondering if I should go down to the kitchen
and see about some dinner."

"They'd feed you your own ears if you did," Sergeant Dambu said. Noxy
could hear the weariness in her voice. "Do you have any idea what that
monster of yours has done to this town?"

"Oh, they needed an excuse for a good clean-up anyway, didn't they?"
Noxy saw Muddh's mismatched boots again. He stopped a few feet in
front of Sergeant Dambu. "I'm more worried about what it did to
*you*," he said, doing his best to sound concerned.

"Nothing good," the sergeant replied shortly. She made to step past
the smuggler, but he stepped into her way. Their boots were almost
toe-to-toe.

"Let me look at you..." he said softly. There was a pause, and then
Noxy heard him say, "Oh, Dambu. Dambu, girl---you shouldn't have done
this. Not this. Not for them."

"You didn't leave me much choice," the sergeant replied. "There would
have been nothing left of this town but mud by the time it was done."

"But girl, there's not even going to be mud left by the time we're
done.  You know that!" Muddh sounded amused.

Sergeant Dambu was silent. "And I'm afraid that's the bad news I'm
here to give you," the smuggler continued. "I'm not going to be able
to finish this on my own. I'm going to need your help."

Sergeant Dambu snorted. "Mine? Look at me, Muddh---look at me. Here,
would you like one as a souvenir?"

"Shh, shh," Muddh said soothingly, even as he stepped back. "Don't do
that. Don't pull at them. Just leave them alone. We'll be done soon,
done for good, and then you can just magic yourself up a whole new set
of teeth." He stepped forward again. Noxy heard a rustling sound as he
hugged the sergeant.

*If the door wasn't closed, I could get past them now,* Noxy thought.
*Oh, Dolly, be careful...*

"What happened, anyway?" Sergeant Dambu asked.

"Turns out the Blight didn't like us much," Muddh replied. "And after
all we're going to do for it---shows you what kind of gratitude you
can expect from dirt and rocks, eh?" He sighed. "The bad news is that
Old Musclebrain managed to knock the spirit trap out of my hands. I'm
sorry, girl, but it's gone---the land swallowed it up." He made a
gulping noise to illustrate. "We're going to have to do this the hard
way."

There was a moment of silence. "What do you mean?" Sergeant Dambu
asked hollowly, as if she already knew the answer, but still had some
hope that she was wrong.

"I mean you're going to have to break the spells on the dam yourself,"
Muddh said. "No, listen, listen to me," he added urgently, answering
some look that Noxy couldn't see. "Just listen. You can do it, I know
you can. It doesn't matter how much it takes out of you, not this
time. Once we can get to the lake and back out again without turning
into dust, you'll have all the magic you've ever wanted, all the magic
you've ever dreamed of. It'll be just those stories Dad used to
tell. You'll have the power of the stars, the wind, the, the, I don't
know, the whole *ocean*! But you have to break that dam. Dambu, you
have to. We're so close."

"I can't," the magician told him faintly. "Not now. There are five
different spells that have to be cast. The guards would stop me before
I was halfway through the first one."

"Well, if that braying little donkey of a prince had taken the whole
troop with him, that wouldn't be a problem," Muddh snarled. "Can you
order them away? Can you, I don't know, can you send them to look for
what's-her-name, the girl?"

"I could..." Sergeant Dambu said slowly. "Or I could have them help
clear up the mess your tornado made. If I gave them their orders in
ones and twos, they wouldn't realize the dam's been left unguarded."
Noxy saw the sergeant's feet walk over to the cot, and heard it creak
as she sat down. "I'm just so tired..."

Noxy held her breath, then sloowwwwly slid forward so that she could
peek under the sheet and see what was happening in the room. Muddh
was fishing around in his pack. Sergeant Dambu was looking at her
reflection in the mirror he had come through. Finally Muddh said,
"Aha!"  He pulled a small black cloth bag out of his pack, loosened
the drawstring, and pulled out a clear glass marble.

He frowned at it. "Almost empty, almost," he muttered. He sniffed at
it, then held it out to Sergeant Dambu. "Do you think there's enough
left for another trip?" he asked.

"I don't know," the sergeant said dully.

"Hmph." Muddh up-ended the bag and shook it out onto the desk. He
picked up one of the pebbles that rattled onto the desk, sniffed at
it, then licked it as if it were a piece of candy. "Nope," he said. He
picked up another. "Definitely not. Ah, here we are." He showed
Sergeant Dambu the pebble he had selected. "The back wall of the old
farmhouse. Remember how we used to hide there when it was time to do
chores?"

"Did we?" Sergeant Dambu said, sounding for a moment like the little
girl she had once been, back before the Blight took her home away from
her. "I wish---I wish I could remember."

"I'll do the remembering for both of us," Muddh promised. "For as
long as I have to. But that won't be much longer, will it?"

Sergeant Dambu blinked and heaved a deep sigh. "What are you doing?"
she asked, as if waking from a deep sleep.

"We can't take any chances, not now," the skinny smuggler said. He
showed her the marble and the pebble he had selected. "I told them
all, if we got separated, they should make for the farmhouse. The
land's pretty quiet around there, and slower than most of the Blight."
He snorted a laugh. "Dad did that much right at least."

He closed his hand into a fist. "Tell your troops you've found out by
magic that we're riding on Apple Bridge. Tell them, I don't know, tell
them you had a vision when you were fighting the tornado, but you only
just remembered it. Whatever you say, make sure you send them along
the south road. The *south* road, all right? We'll wait for them where
the road comes around what used to be Aunt Angela's place."

Sergeant Dambu sighed again. "Do we have to?" she asked.

"No," the smuggler said uncaringly, "But it's the safest card to
play."  He leaned over and kissed her cheek. "I'll see you when it's
over," he said. "And I promise, it'll be over soon."

He straightened up, shouldered his pack, and tossed the marble and
pebble underhanded into the mirror. Instead of bouncing off, they made
a slight *gloop*. Once again ripples spread across the mirror. Muddh
stepped into them and disappeared.

Sergeant Dambu waited a few seconds, then stood up, crossed over to
the desk, picked up her sword, and drew it. "You can come out now,
Noxy," she said quietly.

Noxy held her breath, but didn't move. Sergeant Dambu waited a second,
then flipped the sheet up with her sword. "I saw you in the mirror,"
she said tiredly. "Now come out. And please, don't try to yell." The
sergeant hefted the sword. "It's been a while since I had to use one
of these, but you know what they say---once you learn, you never
forget."

Noxy edged out from underneath the dresser. As she did so, Sergeant
Dambu stepped sideways to stay between Noxy and the door.

They studied each other for a few heartbeats while Noxy dusted herself
off. Sergeant Dambu spoke first. "Aren't you going to ask me why?"

"I really don't care," Noxy said bitterly. "All I care about is that
you're going to hurt a lot of people. A *lot* of people. And my cloud,
too."

Sergeant Dambu smiled faintly. "And all I care about is what's under
Fast Lake. Muddh's shown me things, things I never knew were
possible. He found a spirit trap, just a hoop of copper with some
wires on it. Do you know what it did? It let the person a spell was
*for* pay for it, instead of the person casting it. Just think what
that would mean! Just think what it would be like to be able to do
magic without---without---" She put her hand to her mouth and
tugged. "Without this!"

Noxy looked away from the tooth that Sergeant Dambu was holding out.
"And that's worth killing everyone in Apple Bridge?" she asked.

"That's worth anything," Sergeant Dambu said, without hesitation,
without a trace of doubt in her voice. "Justice is worth whatever it
costs."

"Justice?" Noxy gasped in outrage. "Where's the justice in killing
innocent people!?"

"Where's the justice in magicians having to scrape themselves down to
the bone, year after year, for other people's sake?" Sergeant Dambu
snapped back. "And where's the justice in spending your whole life
just trying to keep a lid on some garbage that some magician who was
dead two hundred years before I was born couldn't be bothered to clean
up for himself?" She gestured with the sword at the cot. "Now *sit
down!* I have work to do, and I can't have you running around getting
in the way."

Noxy crossed her arms. "What are you going to do? Put me to sleep for
a hundred years?"

"No," Sergeant Dambu said, tired again. "I'm going to tie you up. I
can't afford to waste any magic putting a spell on you right now."

Noxy edged over to the cot and sat down. Without looking away from
her, the sergeant reached down to open her kit bag, then pulled out a
coil of heavy twine. "Put out your hands," she ordered Noxy. "On
second thought, stand up, so that I can---"

The door burst open with a bang. Sergeant Dambu whirled around,
raising her sword, but Dolly ducked under it. Before Noxy could fill
her lungs to scream, Dolly grabbed her by the waist, slung her over a
shoulder, and leaped through the open window.

"Hang on!" Dolly yelled. Noxy caught just a glimpse of the ground
beneath her, far beneath her, then went *oomph!* as Dolly caught a
branch of one of the apple trees that grew next to the garrison house
and swung them around. Something sizzled behind them as Dolly grabbed
another branch, then half-slithered, half-slid down the tree onto a
shingled roof.

"Stop! Stop!" Noxy shouted. "We're---ooph!---we're far enough away!"

Dolly slowed, then put Noxy down and collapsed in a heap. "I'm too old
to be doing things like that," she wheezed. "As a matter of fact, now
that I think about it, I don't think I was ever young enough."

"Did you hear them? Did you?" Noxy demanded.

Dolly nodded. Noxy could hear the old orangutan's breath rasping in
and out. "Just...just the last bit. About...about sending the soldiers
away."

"We have to stop them!" Noxy said. "They'll---"

"How?" Dolly gasped.

Noxy opened her mouth to say, "We'll tell the soldiers," then closed
it again. Dolly was right. It would be their word against Sergeant
Dambu's.

"What---spell---" Dolly tried to say.

"It's all right, don't talk," Noxy said to her, suddenly concerned.
The old orangutan's eyes were wide, and Noxy could see her chest
heaving. She reached out impulsively and put her arms around her
rescuer. "Thank you," she said softly, hugging Dolly.

Dolly just nodded. Gradually her heartbeat began to slow down. "What
if she casts a spell on us?" she finally managed to say. "With a
hairbrush, or---"

"She doesn't have the strength," Noxy said, trying to sound more
certain than she felt. "She needs it all for the dam. But we have to
do something to stop her. We have to save the town!"

## A Trap Is Sprung

Noxy's feet dangled in the air. "Is it all right, dear?" Dolly asked.

"Yes," Noxy said breathlessly. "You can let go."

The orangutan released her arm. She dropped into the alley with an
*oomph!* Dolly landed down beside her a moment later.

"Are you hurt?" she asked in a concerned voice.

"Just... winded..." Noxy gasped. She gave herself another moment, then
stood up and brushed the dirt from her knees. "Come on."

They crept as quietly as they could through the narrow alley toward
the rear courtyard. Shouts came, and they froze, but it was just a
couple of soldiers who needed help moving an uprooted tree.

Noxy almost jumped out of her skin at the sound of three sharp whistle
blasts. The sound was so loud that she and Dolly both clapped their
hands over their ears. Noxy looked around wildly, sure that the
whistle blower had to have been right behind them, but no-one was
there.

"What was that?" Dolly asked fearfully.

"I don't know," Noxy said. "But we're almost there." She closed her
eyes and mind-spoke to Charger, calming the nervous cloud.

They had only gone another few steps when they heard shouts and
commotion behind them. Noxy hesitated, then put her finger to her lips
to signal 'quiet' and crept back the way they had come. By the time
she reached the other end of the alley, two squads of soldiers were
already lined up in the main courtyard. More came running into their
places as she watched.

Sergeant Dambu stood in front of them with her head and shoulders
bowed.  She was leaning on a walking stick, and seemed oblivious to
the noise around her. *She must have used magic to make her whistle
louder,* Noxy thought.

"Oh no!" Dolly whispered, peeking around Noxy's waist. "She's going to
send them out to be ambushed, like she said!"

"We have to stop her!" Noxy said.

"Wait, no!" Dolly hissed, grabbing Noxy just as the cloudherd started
to step out of the alley. She pulled Noxy back a few paces and spun
her around. "Who do you think they'll believe, us or her?"

"But we have to try!" Noxy pleaded. "The smugglers will kill them!"

"They'll believe their sergeant before they'll believe an orangutan
and a foreign girl," Dolly said resignedly.

When Sergeant Dambu spoke, her voice was too weak to carry to the
alley.  All Noxy and Dolly heard were a few disjointed words:
"...hill... call... help...  wounded... quickly..." Then the soldiers
saluted and ran for the stables, leaving the sergeant standing alone
in the middle of the courtyard.

"Come on!" Noxy hissed. Once again Dolly had to grab her and hold her
back.

"What do you think you're doing?" the orangutan asked. "She's still
strong enough to make the whistle that we heard. Do you think she
won't have enough strength to put you to sleep, or make you mute?"

"But we have to do something!" Noxy protested. Out on the square,
Sergeant Dambu looked up tiredly. Dolly and Noxy froze as the magician
glanced around, then shook her head and started walking toward the
gateway.

"Mope will know what to do," Noxy said suddenly. "He went down to the
warehouses to help rescue someone."

They waited until Sergeant Dambu had left the courtyard, then waited a
few heartbeats longer. "Ready?" Noxy whispered. Dolly nodded. "All
right, let's go." They ran across the courtyard to the archway and out
into the street.

It only took them a couple of minutes to get down to the chaos by the
docks. One old warehouse had collapsed completely, while the top part
of the wall of another had fallen in one piece into the street. It lay
there like a jigsaw puzzle that someone had been too bored to finish
assembling. The townspeople were working like busy ants to clear away
the rubble and find anyone who might be trapped underneath.

"Mope! Mope!" Noxy yelled, trying to make herself heard above the
noise and confusion.

"The ape's inside!" a familiar voice shouted back at her. The baker
was standing there with an armload of rubble in his arms, and so much
dust and mud on his face that Noxy wouldn't have recognized him if it
weren't for his deep voice.

"Are you all right?" she asked.

"I'm fine," he said, "But Jokhang---that thing swatted him like a
fly."

Noxy opened her mouth, but all she could think of saying was, "I'm
sorry." She turned and climbed up the ruins of the collapsed wall
behind Dolly.

Dolly helped to pull her up to what was left of the warehouse's upper
floor. "Mope?" they shouted. "Mope, where are you?"

"Mother?" a muffled voice shouted back. "Noxy? Is that you?" They
stepped forward cautiously. The middle of the floor had fallen in
completely when the roof had collapsed onto it. Down in the pit below
they saw Mope and two humans looking up at them anxiously. One of the
humans was the leek seller who had refused to serve Dolly. Noxy gasped
as she suddenly realized that the bundle of rags the trio was gathered
around was a man, whose leg was trapped underneath a fallen roof
timber.

"Mother, we need help down here!" Mope said urgently. "We can't lift
this on our own!"

Dolly didn't hesitate. In one fluid motion she crouched down, grabbed
a protruding floor beam, swung down beneath it, and dropped down to
the floor below. "Where do you want me?" she asked her son, brushing
her hands against her jacket.

Mope pointed at the other side of the fallen roof timber. "Over
there," he ordered. "And you two, grab the end and try to lift it from
there.  Ready? One... two... three!"

The man whose leg was caught screamed as the roof timber
shifted. "Back up!" Mope grunted at him. The man dragged himself
backward a pace. His four rescuers let the roof timber crash to the
ground and rushed to him.

"Lift his leg," Mope ordered the leek seller, pulling off his
shirt. The man screamed again. Mope twisted his shirt to make a short,
thick rope, then tied it around the man's leg. He picked up a short
runner of wood that had probably been meant for training vines and
stuck it through the makeshift tourniquet. With a grunt, he twisted it
around twice.

"That ought to stop the bleeding," he said. "But we have to get him to
a doctor."

"Mope---we need to talk to you," his mother said urgently. "It's about
the sergeant. She---" Dolly cut herself off as the leek seller and the
other man lifted the wounded man to carry him out.

The younger orangutan sat back on his haunches. "What has she done
now?"  he asked wearily. "Are we all under curfew?"

"No, worse." His mother dropped her voice. "Noxy and I heard her
talking to that trader, the one who took Princess Ogmin. They're
working together! Mope, they want to destroy the dam! She's sent all
of the soldiers out of town to be ambushed, and she's going to break
the spells on the dam!"

Mope stared at his mother. "I can't believe it," he finally said. "As
much as I dislike her, I can't believe that she'd---"

"Believe it," Noxy said. She had followed Dolly's route to the floor,
but less gracefully, and was now limping slightly. "He came through
the mirror. I think he's her brother."

"Her brother? But he's old enough to be---oh." Mope fell silent for a
moment as he worked it out. "Why would they want to destroy the dam?"

"I think they want to drain some of the magic out of Fast Lake so that
Muddh can get to it," Noxy explained. "There's magic there that works
in reverse, kind of. It takes strength from the people it works on,
instead of from the magician casting the spell."

Noxy wouldn't have thought that an orangutan's face could go pale the
way that Mope's did. "So it *does* exist..." he whispered.  "There are
stories---old stories, nightmares. That's what finally brought the sky
down on the Pilots. Someone invented a kind of magic that took from
the people it worked on, whether they wanted it or not.  But it always
took more than the magic was worth. They used it on themselves until
they'd used each other up."

"Well, Muddh has one, whatever it is," Noxy said. "And now Sergeant
Dambu's sent the soldiers out of town. Mope, she's could be at the dam
right now! She might already have started!"

"I wondered what that whistle was about," Mope muttered. He looked up
at Noxy. "Is your cloud strong enough to fly yet?" he asked.

Noxy nodded. Mope stood up with a grunt. "Good. You go and warn the
soldiers. Mother and I will figure out some way to stop Sergeant
Dambu."

Dolly stretched up onto her tiptoes to kiss the cloudherd on the
cheek.  "Be careful, dear."

Noxy ran as fast as she could back to the garrison house, no longer
caring if she was seen. Charger hovered restlessly a few feet off the
ground. Noxy jumped up and grabbed the side of the cloud with both
hands.

"Up!" she mind-spoke as she pulled herself up. "Up, up, up!"

Charger rose into the air, slowly at first and then faster. In a few
heartbeats Noxy was up above the rooftops. She glanced at the dam, but
couldn't see Sergeant Dambu. "Fast!" she mind-spoke at Charger. They
turned south and started flying above the road that led to the Blight.

Noxy crept forward until she was right at the cloud's edge. The
countryside below her was green and peaceful in the summer sun. She
saw some farmers leading horse-drawn carts toward Apple Bridge, but
was too high up to call to them.

"Higher!" she mind-ordered the cloud. Charger struggled to
obey. "Higher!  Slow!" The cloud slowed to a gentle float, and rose
higher.

Noxy scanned the landscape. The road made a long, gentle loop around a
hill up ahead. If she went around the hill the other way, over the
forest, she could save a few minutes. "Left!" she mind-spoke to Charger.
The cloud began to gather speed.

Something glinted in the trees. Noxy lay flat on Charger and took a deep
breath. Grabbing the cloud firmly with both hands, she pushed her head
over the cloud's edge. "Stop! Stop!" she ordered. She waited. The
glint came again.

"Down, slowly," she mind-spoke. For a moment she almost convinced
herself that the tiny flashes of light had come from a small stream or
pool, but then she saw movement. A moment later she could make out
people and horses. It was the smugglers.

One of them looked up as the cloud's shadow fell across his face. Noxy
had just enough time to recognize Muddh before the skinny man
shouted. The smuggler next to him twisted around in his saddle and
aimed his bow at Charger. Noxy jerked her head back. The arrow went
*sfffft!* through the air.

"Go! Go!" she mind-shouted at the cloud. Another arrow shot past the
edge of the cloud, and then Noxy shrieked as one tore through the
cloud only a few feet away from her.

They flew back along the road, around the hill. There were the
soldiers!  "Look out!" Noxy shouted. They looked up. "Ambush! In the
trees!"

It was as if she had kicked a beehive. Suddenly the soldiers had their
swords in their hands, and were galloping forward. Noxy turned Charger
in a wide arc and flew back over the battle. This time the smugglers
ignored her. A few arrows flew, but the first squad of soldiers came
crashing through the trees too quickly for the smugglers to get off a
second shot.

Outnumbered, and without the advantage of surprise, the smugglers
turned and tried to flee through the dense undergrowth. They didn't
make it very far. A few tried to fight as the soldiers caught up with
them, but most dropped their swords or bows and raised their hands.

"Yahoo!" Noxy shouted. "That's the---no, wait, over there! Over there!
He's getting away!" She pointed frantically at the road, trying to get
Charger to go lower so that she could tell the soldiers that Muddh was
escaping. The smuggler had abandoned his horse, and was running down
the road toward the Blight. Every second step carried him twenty yards
or more. Noxy urged Charger on, but Muddh and his one magic boot soon
outdistanced the cloud.

Noxy finally gave up, and turned the cloud back to where the soldiers
were collecting the defeated smugglers. She let Charger float down
gently until they were just a few feet above the trees.

"Are you all right?" shouted a soldier.

"I was about to ask you the same thing," she shouted back.

The soldier grinned. "Any day you win a fight like this is a good
one," he said. His grin vanished. "But we have to keep moving. The
prince needs us."

"No, wait! That's not true! It was a trick!" Noxy saw the doubt on the
soldier's face, and on the other faces that had turned up to look at
her. She took a deep breath. "Sergeant Dambu is working with the
smugglers. I don't know where Prince Thokmay is, but you have to get
back to Apple Bridge right away. She's going to try to break the
spells on the dam!"

"What!?" the soldier exclaimed. "But---"

"Please, you have to believe me!" Noxy said urgently. "They're going
to destroy the whole town!"

She saw the doubt on the soldier's face. Her heart sank as he said, "I
don't believe it. Not the sergeant. You can't be right."

"Please!" Noxy pleaded. "How do you think they knew to wait for you
here? Just send some of your troops back to the dam. You'll see!"

Before the soldier could reply, Noxy mind-ordered Charger back into the
sky and headed for Apple Bridge.

Meanwhile, back in town, Dolly and Mope made their way toward the dam
through the wreckage left by the tornado. They stopped only once, to
help get an overturned wagon the right side up so that it could be
moved out of the street.

They were still two blocks away from the dam when Mope pulled up
short.  "What's that?" he asked, clocking his head to one side. "That
sound..." He looked grim. "She's chanting. It's started."

They ran as fast as their awkward gait would carry them to the dam
road.  As they came around the last corner, they saw Sergeant Dambu
standing in the middle of the wooden walkway that ran along the top of
the dam. Her arms were raised, and her voice echoed around them with
unnatural clarity. The air in front of her shimmered with a faint blue
light that grew stronger even as Mope and Dolly watched.

"Stay here!" Mope told his mother. He scooped up a stone from the
road, hefted it, and threw it at the sergeant as hard as he could. He
grabbed two more while the first was still in the air and charged onto
the walkway.

His first stone hit Sergeant Dambu in the shoulder. She stumbled
forward, nearly falling off the dam into the Trout below. Mope threw
another stone on the run. Sergeant Dambu ducked, but the stone went
wide anyway.

The sergeant straightened up and made a backhanded gesture at
Mope. The rock that had hit her leaped into the air and flew at
Mope. It hit Mope in the middle of his chest with the force of a
hammer, knocking him off his feet. Sergeant Dambu gestured again, and
a thin sheet of flame raced across the dam. Mope rolled sideways with
a yelp, feeling a blast of heat as the fire singed his hair.

He scrambled onto his feet. Sergeant Dambu had drawn her sword. Mope
feinted left, then right, then lunged at her. The point of her sword
followed his every move. He had to pull up short to avoid being
spitted.

"It looks like a stand-off," he puffed. "I can't get past your blade,
but you can't look away from me to cast your spells."

"I don't have to look away," Sergeant Dambu said. "I just have to give
it a bit... more... *effort*..."

Suddenly the air started to sparkle again, brighter and brighter. Mope
heard a roaring sound. Something dark, a shadow that somehow wasn't
quite there, was piling up against the brightness in the air. A smell
like swamp mud and lightning mixed together was suddenly all around
them. The dam rumbled as the spells that held it together began to
break.

"You'll kill us both!" Mope shrieked.

"Small... price..." Sergeant Dambu gasped. Mope heard something splash
in the river below, and heard a bellow of triumph as whatever it was
broke through the spells and headed down the Trout.  The smell in the
air around him was getting stronger and stronger.

Mope feinted again, but the sergeant's swordpoint followed him like a
cobra. He took a deep breath---

---and a pale form on four legs bounded past him and leaped for the
sergeant's throat. Sergeant Dambu screamed as Edward's ghost slammed
into her, knocking her onto her knees.

"*My* town!" the ghost snarled. It leaped at her again, howling as
Sergeant Dambu's sword cut deep into its shoulder. Ghostly blood
poured out of the wound like smoke. The dog howled. It gathered itself
up for one last leap---

---and Dolly swung up onto the bridge behind Sergeant Dambu, waddled
forward two steps, and thumped her hard on the back of the head.

The sergeant dropped like a sack of potatoes. The sparkles in the air
flared like fireworks, and then were gone.

Edward's ghost stood over the fallen soldier, growling low in its
throat. It raised its nose and sniffed the air, then half-turned its
head toward Mope. "Humans," it snorted as its began to fade. "They
just don't understand..."

"Mother! Mother, are you all right?" The younger orangutan hopped
awkwardly over Sergeant Dambu and hugged his mother. They were both
crying, he realized. When had he started crying?

"Oh, Mope," Dolly sniffed. "I thought---I thought I was going to lose
you." She squeezed him tight. "Your father would have been so proud."

Mope hugged his mother back. "Thank you," he said. "He'd be proud of
you too."
