---
layout: narrow
title: "The Princess and the Bear"
dedication: "For Madeleine, who is taking me on the greatest journey of my life."
author: "Greg Wilson"
permalink: /princess-bear/
---

## Prolog

*Consider Cherne.  A diamond adrift in the heavens, it measures eight thousand
gallops from bow to stern and six thousand from port to starboard.  Its single
continent is surrounded on all sides by an ocean whose outer shore rises up to
hold the world as a child might cup a drop of water in her hand.*

*Chernese history began with the Pilots, and nearly ended with them as well.
Powerful and inhuman, their reign ended in a long war that scarred the moon,
turned Lake Karaband into a sea of glass, and littered the land with strange
magic.  When the war was over the Pilots were gone, leaving humanity and the
Gifted to carry on as best they could.*

*Now look there, where the Brumoso Mountains tumble down toward the ocean and
ninety little kingdoms squabble endlessly with their neighbors.  A small herd of
panicked clouds is fleeing west over orchards and fields.  On the back of one of
those clouds is a young woman.  She had high hopes for the day, but now all she
wants to do is survive.*

## Chapter 1: An Unexpected Meeting

The tornado roared, tearing at the trees beneath it like an angry child pulling
up handfuls of grass.  *Left! Left!* Noxy mind-shouted, squelching her own panic
so that the young cloud beneath her wouldn't sense it and panic in turn.

Cloak hesitated. *Left!* Noxy ordered as forcefully as she could.

As the cloud began to turn, Noxy heard a mighty *crack!* She hoped it was just
an apple tree being snapped in two---she had seen farmers' cottages nestled
among the orchards below before the tornado appeared.  She had seen people too,
pointing and waving at the clouds overhead and then running for cover when the
tornado attacked out of a clear blue sky.

Noxy wiped wind-blown grit from her eyes, but more immediately blew into her
face. She could barely see Rind and the others in front of her. *Faster!* she
urged.

Cloak struggled to obey.  They had been flying since before dawn, and she could
mind-hear him tiring.  *Please,* she mind-spoke.  *I know you can do it.*

Without warning a branch as thick as Noxy's leg tore through the cloud and
clubbed her shoulder. She was airborne for one sickening moment before falling
back onto Cloak.  She dug one hand into the cloud and held on as tightly as she
could.  *Down!  Down!  Down!* she mind-shouted, not realizing that she was
screaming the words as well.

The injured cloud plummeted toward the ground. Noxy glanced back, afraid the
tornado would follow, but it had stopped above a pile of wreckage that had been
a barn moments before to tear the boards apart and whirl them around. Noxy cried
out at the sight of people tumbling through the air, but it was just laundry on
a clothesline.

Cloak scraped his belly against the trees, then sagged to the ground with a
mind-spoken mewl of pain. Noxy slid down his side, gasping as she jostled her
bruised arm. The branch had torn open the sleeve of her gray leather coat and
the heavy quilted shirt she wore underneath it, but had only scraped her
skin. Her knees went weak as she realized how close a call she'd had.

She and Cloak had come down on a narrow dirt track through a patch of forest
that lay between two apple orchards.  The summer-green branches of the oaks and
maples around them still shook in the wind, but she and Cloak were safe, at
least for now.  She took a shaky breath.  Rind and the other cloudherds would
have seen her land.  They would come and find her once the tornado was gone.
There was nothing she could do but wait while the tornado turned the farm into
kindling and then went in search of something new to destroy.

Hooves drummed on the road behind her. Half a dozen soldiers in yellow jackets
galloped toward her on stocky ponies. She struggled to her feet with a grimace.

The lead rider reined in a few paces away. "Are you all right?" he asked,
raising the black-and-yellow battle mask that covered his face.

"We're fine," Noxy said, cradling her bruised arm. "Did you see the others?"

"They went along by west," the soldier said, pointing.  "Looks like they all got
by clear."

A second rider shouldered his horse past the first.  "Noxy?" he asked
incredulously, his voice breaking. "Is that you?"

Noxy stared at the newcomer.  How did he know her name?

The second rider raised his battle mask to reveal a young man with four parallel
scars glistening slightly against the dark skin of his left cheek.  "Noxy---what
are you doing here?"

"Thokmay?"  Noxy stared at the prince of Gandan, cloud and arm both momentarily
forgotten.  She struggled to her feet.  "How---" Before she could finish her
sentence the world started to spin.  She sagged back against her cloud.

"Noxy!" The prince leaped down from his horse. He paid no attention to Cloak
edging away nervously as he helped her sit back down on the hard-packed dirt
track.

"I'm all right," Noxy protested, trying weakly to shake him off. "It's Cloak
that's been hurt." She tried to struggle back to her feet, but the prince put a
hand on her shoulder to stop her.

"Just sit a moment," he said firmly. "Jinpa!"

"*Sra*?" one of the soldiers answered.

"That farm we passed," the prince said, pointing back along the track. "See if
you can get help."

"Yes *sra*!"  The soldier snapped his horse's reins, only to pull up sharply
when Noxy said, "Wait!"

This time the prince didn't stop her from getting up. "The farm's gone," she
said. "The tornado tore it to pieces. I saw people running..."

The prince's jaw tightened. "Manpa!" he barked, his voice breaking again.
"You're with Jinpa. See if there are any survivors. Help them if you can. Double
time!" The two soldiers saluted and galloped away.

The prince looked back at Noxy. "Well," he said in a bemused voice.  "It's good
to see you, but what are you doing *here*?  It's a long way from Stale."

Noxy shrugged, then winced. This wasn't how she had imagined meeting the prince
again, not at all. "We were on our way to Chaghan.  Rind got a contract for some
rain there---she's the mayor now---and Apple Bridge was sort of on the way,
and..."  She shrugged again to hide her embarrassment.  She had wanted to
surprise him...

Before the prince could reply, one of soldiers called out, "*Sra*---above us!"
The other clouds had returned.

Rind brought her cloud down onto the road two dozen strides from Cloak and slid
off while her mount was still settling. Like Noxy, she wore her frizzy black
hair in long braids, but her leather coat was fringed with red and orange twists
of ribbon.  Her dark face was as narrow and as fierce as a mountain hawk's.

She strode over to Cloak without as much as glancing at Noxy, the prince, or the
soldiers and laid her hands on its flank.  "Sh, sh, sh," she said soothingly as
she closed her eyes to mind-speak with the injured cloud.

Thokmay caught Noxy's eye and raised his eyebrows.  Noxy shook her head
slightly---she still hadn't told anyone her secret.  The prince nodded almost
imperceptibly.

Rind gave Cloak one last reassuring pat.  "He could have been torn to shreds,"
she said flatly, rounding on Noxy. "And *you* could have been killed.  I'd never
have heard the end of *that*."

"Yes, *sra*," Noxy said, eyes downcast.

Rind glanced at Prince Thokmay and did a double take. "Oh hells," she said
blankly.  "What are you doing here?"

"That does seem to be the question of the day," the prince said mildly, his
voice cracking.  As Rind opened her mouth to reply, he continued, "We were on
our way to escort the new envoy from Chaghan into Apple Bridge when we spotted
the tornado.  I expect he'll have gone on ahead---we should get moving too in
case the tornado comes back."

Rind's eyes narrowed. "Comes back?"  She hesitated before grudgingly adding,
"Your Highness."

The prince nodded. "It's not just some monster out of the Blight. It's been
hitting homes and farms for three weeks now, all people who've been helping us
track down contrabanders."

"You think someone summoned a tornado?" Rind said incredulously.

The prince shook his head. "No.  That tornado probably spent the last thousand
years in a bottle at the bottom of Fast Lake.  Some contrabander must have
dredged it up or found it floating in the river.  It's just our bad luck
that---"

"Your Highness!" The soldiers who had gone down the road had come trotting
back. Two frightened boys in hand-me-down clothes were sitting behind Jinpa,
while an old woman rode behind Manpa.

The two boys stared wide-eyed at the pair of grounded clouds while their
grandmother told her story.  The farm, it was her son-in-law's, she'd moved in
after the children were born, and they'd been out pruning, her daughter and her
husband that is, not the boys, and they'd seen some men in the forest with a
cart, and, well, everyone knew some people had a little business now and again
that other folk shouldn't pry into, but these weren't anyone her son-in-law
recognized, and they'd talked about it and decided they ought to tell someone,
and they needed some new clothes for the boys, they were growing so fast, so
they'd gone into town that morning, and then that thing came out of nowhere, and
the boys had been so brave, but what was she going to tell her daughter and her
son-in-law about the house?  The roof was gone, and the chicken coop, and the
whole *barn*, and---

"His Majesty will pay to have it all rebuilt," the prince told her soothingly.
"But right now, my men will see you safely into Apple Bridge. You can stay there
as long as you need to."

The old woman nodded, fighting tears.  The prince turned back to Rind. "You
would be welcome in Apple Bridge as well, of course."

"Out of the question," Rind said sharply. "We've already lost half a day, and if
the tornado comes back---"

"But Cloak is hurt," Noxy interrupted, "He'll never make it to Chaghan if he
doesn't get some time to heal."

"We don't *have* time," Rind snapped.  "We have a contract, and we're already
going to be late."

"Then I'll stay here with Cloak until he's better," Noxy declared.

"Out of the question," Rind repeated, crossing her arms. "I'm not leaving one of
my riders in the middle of nowhere."

"I'm old enough to take care of myself!" Noxy said indignantly.

"Just like you took care of Cloak?" Rind shot back.

The prince cleared his throat.  "I will take responsibility for her," he said.
"She can stay at the garrison house and her cloud can use the courtyard until
they're able to catch up with you."

Rind threw up her hands. "Like mother, like daughter.  Just promise me you won't
go looking for trouble."

"I never go *looking* for trouble," Noxy muttered, but Rind was already
scrambling back onto her cloud. A few moments later she was airborne, heading
west with the rest of the herd.

The prince's carefully polite expression turned wistful as he watched the clouds
fly away. "Can your cloud make it to Apple Bridge?" he asked Noxy.

She put her hand on Cloak's flank and mind-spoke with him before nodding.  "Yes,
if we go slowly. I've been pushing him pretty hard to keep up with the others,"
she added, feeling a sudden pang of guilt. "I think that's why we couldn't get
away from the tornado like they did."

The prince handed his horse's reins to Jinpa. "Put the lady and her young men on
Bucketbreath here," he ordered. "See them safely back to town, and tell the
staff that they're to be given rooms in the garrison guest house if they can't
find something more suitable.  I will take the cloud back with Noxious."

The soldier cleared his throat. "Um, *sra*, are you sure---"

"We'll all be safer if someone is in a position to spot the tornado returning,"
the prince said crisply.

"Yes *sra*," Jinpa replied doggedly, "But---well, Sergeant Gyalpa said to be
double sure you were back along the garrison in time for the dinner tonight.
With the new envoy, *sra*.  What with protocol and all along by that."

The prince muttered something about protocol under his breath.  "The cloud won't
be any slower than horseback," he continued in a normal voice.  "And if I'm
late, I'll tell the good sergeant it was my fault."

"Yes *sra*," Jinpa said glumly.  He exchanged a look with Manpa that said it
wouldn't matter to the sergeant whose fault the prince said it was.

Prince Thokmay pointed at the two little boys.  "You two keep an eye out as
well," he said sternly. "If you see any sign of trouble, you tell these men
right away, all right?"

"Yes *sra*," the older one said. His brother just stared wide-eyed at the the
prince, the cloud, and the big wide world he'd suddenly found himself in.

It took Noxy two tries to get back onto Cloak.  Wisely, the prince didn't try to
help.  Once she was settled, he pulled himself up onto the cloud behind her and
sat quietly as they lifted into the air.

They levelled off a hundred strides above the trees and turned toward Apple
Bridge.  The soft, slightly damp feel of the cloud brought memories flooding
back to the prince. The last time he had flown had been two years ago. A lot had
changed since then, but not the thrill of being able to see the whole world at
once: the apple orchards, the hackthorn bushes in their summer finery, a trio of
deer by a stream, a farmer shading his eyes to look up as they passed...

And there, in the distance, the Blight.  Centuries ago, the Pilots had dumped
their magical waste there, from spells gone wrong to enchanted creatures so
dangerous that even the Pilots were afraid of them.  At its center lay Fast
Lake, where a year might pass for every day in the normal world.  Around it, the
land was---strange.  Some parts were completely barren, while others were
crowded with pencil trees whose limbs swayed in time to music no human being had
ever heard.  Chaghan lay on the far side, three days' hard ride for anyone brave
enough to cut across a few outlying patches of Blighted land, or a week for
those who didn't want to risk a stray gust of tainted wind turning their eyes to
glass.

He glanced sidelong at Noxy.  She still had the thick club braid and quick smile
he remembered from his time in Stale, but her legs hadn't been that long, had
they?

He jumped slightly when Noxy said, "So, you're pretty good at giving orders
these days."

The prince shrugged. "Thanks," he said, his voice breaking again. "But Sergeant
Gyalpa is really in charge.  You'll meet him when we get to town. And Sergeant
Dambu too---she's our magician. Mostly I just try to stay out of their way."

"Well, you sounded pretty convincing to me," Noxy said. She lowered her voice
half an octave. "You two keep an eye out."

The prince smiled and cleared his throat. "I never go *looking* for trouble,"
he said in a falsetto voice.

"I don't sound like that!" Noxy said indignantly.

The prince laughed.  "No, but it's the closest I can get."  He glanced down at
the road again and settled himself a bit more comfortably. "How's your mother?"

It was Noxy's turn to shrug. "She's all right, I guess.  She says she's happy to
be herding again."

The prince nodded. "I was surprised to hear she was no longer mayor."

"A lot of people are still angry about what happened," Noxy said, her eyes on
the horizon.  "When Rind said she was going to stand, *amma* said they didn't
have to bother with a vote.  She says she's glad someone else is worrying about
everything, but I think she misses it."

"I know how she feels," the prince said. "I'm glad to be away from all the fuss
at court, but I still miss it sometimes." 

"Is Kulbinder here?" Noxy asked after a few moments of silence. "Your letter
didn't say. It would be good to see him again."

The prince shook his head. "He's with my brother now."

Noxy frowned. "Why? I thought he liked you."

The prince brushed a nonexistent bit of dirt off his uniform jacket. "He
probably does, but Lormay's the heir now."  He couldn't quite keep the
bitterness out of his voice when he continued.  "My father said it would make it
clear to everyone that things have changed. Sending me to Apple Bridge is part
of that too. He said that since I'm never going to rule the kingdom, I have to
find ways to serve it."

"You didn't say anything about that in your letters," Noxy ventured hesitantly.

The corner of the prince's mouth twisted. "I couldn't be sure who was going to
read them."

Noxy flushed. "I never showed them to anyone!" she protested. "Not even Granna
Fee!"

"I don't mean that," the prince apologized hastily. "It's the court I worry
about.  That's the other reason I like being here---nobody's watching everything
I do and gossipping about everything I say."

"That must have been awful," Noxy said.

The prince shrugged again. "That's politics."

They rode in silence before the prince cleared his throat.  "And what
about... you know.  You can still head-talk to clouds from far away?"

"Mind-talk," Noxy corrected automatically.  "And yes, I can still do it."  She
closed her eyes and took a slow breath.  "I can still mind-hear the cloud Rind
is riding, and the rest of the herd too.  And over there."  She pointed without
opening her eyes.  "There are some wild clouds over there somewhere."

"Have you told anyone?"  Noxy shook her head.  The prince waited a heartbeat for
her to speak.  When she didn't, he nodded.  "All right," he promised.  "Our
secret."

## Chapter 2: Apple Bridge

The sun was sitting on the horizon like a fat yellow hen by the time Apple
Bridge came into view.  The town was home to twenty times as many people as
Stale, but seemed small to Noxy after some of the cities she had flown over.

Most of the buildings were two or three stories tall. Their ground floors were
brick and their upper stories wooden, while their roofs were shingled with long
planks bleached gray by the weather and the years.  The smell of cooking rising
from their chimneys made Noxy's stomach rumble.

Most of the town lay on the right bank of the Trout River.  Where it bent toward
the distant sea, four enormous stone pillars left over from the time of the
Pilots rose from the water.  Thick timber beams laid on top of them formed the
covered bridge that gave the town its name.

At the near end of the bridge, inside the river bend, lay a cobbled square. Even
from on high, Noxy could hear the sound of stalls being shuttered and wagons
being loaded as the town's famous Dog Market began to close for the night.

A three-story figure eight stood guard a few blocks away.  "That's the garrison
house," the prince said, pointing.  "My sister and I live upstairs in the north
wing.  The jurister stays there when she's in town too.  The sergeants and
stewards have the ground floor.  The rest is storerooms and stables and the
soldiers' quarters."

"And that's the dam?" Noxy pointed upriver where another four pillars cast long
shadows.  The wooden walkway built on them was smaller than the bridge by the
square, but still sturdy enough to support the weigh of a dozen chain-link nets.
Royal magicians had kept spells on those nets for almost two hundred years to
stop things from the Blight floating downriver.

The prince nodded. "The soldiers go up there every day to see what's washed up.
Most of it is junk, but every once in a while..."  He shrugged.  The land
downriver from them was lush and green, but only a few stunted brambles grew
upstream where the magical outwash from Fast Lake piled up.

"It must be a lot of work to keep it going.  Ulfmaerr---" Noxy paused.  "My
*de-adda* said magicians' spells usually fade away when they do."  *Like he
did,* she thought sadly.  The last time her grandfather had come to Stale he had
hardly been able to hold his own spoon.  His eyes had been as bright as ever,
but had darted from one face to another as he tried to remember people's
names. That had been a year ago. No-one had seen him since.  No-one expected to.

The prince pretended not to notice the change in Noxy's voice. "It is," he said.
"The magician who was here before Sergeant Dambu refreshed it a few years ago,
but she said she could never re-cast it again."  He sighed. "I know they're all
volunteers, and they know what they're getting into, but still..."

"Cheerful as always," Noxy grumbled, punching his arm to make it a joke and then
wincing at the ache in her own.

They landed in the rear courtyard of the garrison house. A middle-aged soldier
with a bushy mustache stood waiting for them. He had two wide black ribbons sewn
onto his sleeve, deep wrinkles near the corners of his eyes, shoulders that
seemed to be as wide as he was tall, and no more expression than a stone.

"Your Highness," he said, snapping a salute as the prince slid off Cloak.

"Sergeant Gyalpa," the prince acknowledged, wiping his hands on his uniform
before returning the salute.  "Allow me to present Probably Noxious of Stale.
She will be staying with us until it is well enough to travel again."

"Honored Noxious." The sergeant bowed formally.

"Please, just call me Noxy," she replied, bowing awkwardly in return.  She
appreciated him keeping a straight face---she knew how odd cloudherds' names
sounded to lowlanders.  Even in the capital, people had sniggered when Rind
introduced herself as Rotting Melon Rind.  "We'll see who's laughing when the
dragons hatch," Rind had said darkly.  "We'll see if *their* names save *them*
from being eaten."

"I take it the soldiers beat me back?" the prince said.

Sergeant Gyalpa nodded.  "Yes *sra*.  They said a farm was near by completely
destroyed.  The woman they had by them said her son-in-law came along into Apple
Bridge today to report some suspicious men.  He left going on about an hour.  I
sent along out some riders, but he's not on the road."

The prince frowned, trying to guess what the sergeant would think was the right
thing to do.  "He may have gone down the south road instead of straight home,"
he ventured.  "Send another couple of riders to look---it would be best if he
didn't get home to find that he no longer has one."

"Yes *sra*," the sergeant said approvingly. He lifted the silver whistle that
hung on a fine chain around his neck and blew two short notes followed by two
long ones.  A moment later a handful of soldiers who had clearly been waiting
for just such a signal trotted onto the courtyard.

"Does the cloud need anything?" Prince Thokmay asked Noxy while the sergeant
gave the new arrivals their orders.

"Just water," Noxy said, rubbing her bruised arm.  "She'll be all right as long
as she gets some rest. But I could use a hot bath."

"Of course. I'll ask Dolly to see to it. She's my sister's nurse," he added when
Noxy raised her eyebrows. "She's used to helping people with their baths."  He
beckoned to a housemaid who had been hovering nearby, then hesitated before
adding, "It's really good to see you again."

"You too," Noxy replied, her face warm despite the early evening chill.

Prince Thokmay watched as the housemaid led Noxy away.  He should probably take
a bath before dinner too, he realized.  And find a clean shirt.  And see if
anyone knew the new Chaghan envoy's name yet.  The outgoing one had claimed not
to know.  "Oh, they don't tell *me* anything," she had lied brightly the last
time he had asked.

But instead of heading to his rooms, he clasped his hands behind his back and
closed his eyes, trying to imagine what it would be like to mind-hear the way
Noxy did.  A *clang* from the kitchen was someone getting a pot down from its
hook on the wall to make dinner.  A duller *clonk, clonk, clonk* from the
building behind him might be the smith mending a sword or bending a horseshoe
into shape.  The occasional *thock!* and curse from the other courtyard was
archery practice---Sergeant Gyalpa had been scathing about the local standard of
marksmanship when they had first arrived, and his opinion hadn't gone up much in
the months since.

"Am I interrupting, Your Highness?" the sergeant asked from behind him.

The prince jumped.  "No!  I mean, not really.  Any word from Sergeant Dambu?"

"Yes *sra*," the sergeant said.  "She and her troop got along back this
afternoon.  They were gone six days, near as they can figure."

"Six days?" The prince blinked. "They must have gone closer to the lake than she
planned."

"Yes *sra*," the sergeant nodded. "They found fresh tracks along by the bank of
the river.  She said they looked as made by a wagon or such."

"A wagon?  You think the smugglers are working that far in?" the prince asked.
Sergeant Gyalpa grunted noncommittally. "All right.  Tell her I'll speak with
her in the morning.  In the morning," he repeated as the sergeant opened his
mouth.  "She needs a good night's sleep, and I need a bath."

"Yes *sra*," Sergeant Gyalpa replied, his face as expressionless as ever.

At that same moment, a few blocks away, a hairy, long-armed figure slurped the
last of his tea in a small shop on the edge of the Dog Market.  He was the
shop's only customer---a few people had stuck their heads in after he had taken
a table, but all had decided to go elsewhere.  The shop's tea blender glowered
behind his counter, arms folded.

"Ah... Delicious.  My compliments on your choice of leaves."  The hairy figure
stood, adjusted the glasses perched on his snub nose, and dropped a few coppers
on the table.  "I will *definitely* return."  Ignoring the tea blender's
muttered curse, he sauntered out into the waning afternoon light.

As the stalls in the Dog Market finished packing up, the wealthier merchants
whose shops stood on its perimeter folded down awnings and fastened shutters.
Unsold vegetables were thrown onto two-wheeled scrap wagons and stacked bales of
wool were lifted onto wagons to be taken back to warehouses.  A handful of
farmers interrupted their discussion of the day's barley prices to stare at the
troll as he waddled across the cobblestones.  "Good evening and good morrow," he
said cheerfully, nodding to them and continuing on without waiting for a reply
that never came.

He had just reached the market gate when a piebald horse suddenly whinnied and
reared up on her hind legs.  "Hold still!"  barked the burly man trying to
harness her between his wagon's draw poles.  "Stupid creature!"  He slapped her
hard across her nose.

The horse reared again, almost pulling her reins out of the farmer's hands.
Rough-edged bricks spilled out of the back of the wagon.  Cursing, the man
yanked drew a willow switch from his belt.  "I said hold *still*!"  He raised
his arm to whip the horse---

---and grunted in surprise as a hairy hand grasped his wrist.  "Now, now,"
chided the troll.  "Let's just think on this for a moment, shall we?  Do unto
others and all that."

"Let go of me, you filthy beast!"  The farmer tried to yank his arm away, but
the troll's grip was like iron.  "I said let go, or I'll give *you* a whipping
too!"

The troll smiled, revealing strong white teeth.  "I doubt that.  And if your
friend comes any closer with that cudgel, I won't be gentle about taking it away
from him."  The man who had been edging up behind the troll stopped short, but
tightened his grip on the stout length of hickory in his hands.

The market had gone silent around the threesome.  The troll let go of the farmer
and wiped his hand ostentatiously on his carefully-combed pelt.  "There, you
see?" he said cheerfully.  "Your horse has calmed down.  It does usually only
take a bit of patience.  Now, let me wish you good evening and---"

A potato flew by his head.  A second one bounced off his arm.  Suddenly the air
was full of eggs and stones and vegetables.  "Skin him!" someone shouted.  "Skin
him!"

The crowd took up the cry.  Suddenly bold, the farmer swung his switch, then
yelped in surprise as he was thrown through the air to crash against a nearby
stall.  The troll spun around just in time to catch the cudgel swung at his
head.  Another yelp was followed by another crash as the troll threw the second
man after the first.

The troll charged into the crowd.  People threw themselves out of his way as he
ran clumsily for the market gate.  "Out of my way!" he yelled, waving one arm
and holding his glasses in place with the other.  He ducked under a roll of
canvas, said, "Excuse me!" to a woman with half a dozen loaves of bread piled in
her arms, scrambled up the gate post, swung himself onto the roof beside it, and
scampered away.

Meanwhile, Prince Thokmay had just closed the door to his room behind him.  A
clean dress shirt was waiting on his pillow and his town boots had been polished
and set at the foot of his bed.  He shrugged off his heavy uniform jacket to
hang it on the tailor's dummy that stood in the corner, then peeled off his
shirt and tossed it into the wicker pail under his bed.  With a quick glance to
make sure no one was watching, he stood in front of his mirror and studied
himself critically.  His shoulders were definitely broader than they had been
six months ago---well, probably.  He wondered if Noxy had noticed.  He had
certainly noticed the way she had changed shape since he had last seen her...

*Rap rap rap!* He jumped at the urgent knock on his window.  "Your Highness!"
panted a familiar voice.  "Might I enter?  I find myself in rather a spot of
trouble."

"Not again," the prince sighed.  He unlatched the window's iron-and-bamboo
shutter and opened the quartered glass pane, then stepped back as the troll
swung itself into his room.

"Thank you, Your Highness," his tutor puffed.  He stood and straightened his
glasses.  "May I suggest that it would perhaps be prudent to re-bar my ingress,
so as not to betray my route to passers by?  Some of whom might regrettably be
in rather foul moods?"

"If you mean close the window so people don't know which way you came,
certainly," the prince said, shaking his head as he did just that.  "So what did
you do *this* time?"

The troll laid his hand on his chest and blinked innocently.  "I merely
attempted to give one of your loyal citizens a lesson on how best to care for
their fellow creatures."

"In other words, you were arguing with someone about their animals?"  The prince
shook his head again.  "Mope, you have to stop doing this."

"I'll stop when they do," the troll said, the humor suddenly gone from his
voice.  "He was whipping the poor creature, Your Highness.  Whipping her!"

"Was she Gifted?"

"That's irrelevant!"  The prince's tutor waved an arm to emphasize his point.
"And it was hardly her fault she was being skittish---some idiot flew a cloud
right over the town this afternoon and scared us all half out of our wits, man
and beast.  *That's* who deserves a whipping!"

"Ah."  The prince coughed.  "About that..."

He eventually managed to interrupt the mild scolding that followed and shoo his
tutor out the door so that he could finish dressing.  As he struggled with the
laces at his cuffs, he studied the family portrait that hung on his wall.  His
father stood in the center in a richly embroidered uniform with the
gold-and-turquoise collar of Gandan securely around his neck and his second wife
beside him in a matching jacket and long flowing trousers.  His youngest son,
Prince Thokmay, stood in front of the king wearing a copy of the royal collar to
show the world that he was the heir.  Prince Thokmay and Princess Ogmin stood to
either side, hands clasped behind their backs.  Two years ago, Thokmay and
Thokmin's positions had been reversed.  He wondered if his brother thought about
that as often as he did.

## Chapter 3: Familiar Faces

*She could have told me she was going to watch,* Noxy thought as she lowered
herself self-consciously into the steaming water.

"Warm enough, miss?" Dolly asked, stirring the coals in the tub's hotbox.  Her
head only came up to Noxy's shoulders, but her arms were longer than Noxy's
legs. Her orange-brown fur was speckled with gray, and her eyes were sad and
wise.

"Yes, thank you," Noxy said. "It's wonderful."  It was actually almost too hot
to bear, but she could feel the ache in her injured arm start to soften.

Dolly smiled. "I'm sure it is, after all you've been through. Now, let me have a
look at that. No, please, don't try to get up, just sit forward a bit. That's
good... that's good... My, that *is* a nasty bruise, isn't it?  You're lucky it
wasn't broken.  Does it hurt when I---I'm sorry. How about this way?"  She
clucked her tongue, then went over to the cabinet next to the window and
rummaged around. "I'm *sure* I've got some left," she said to herself.

Noxy looked around the room as the troll sniffed the contents of various jars
and bottles. The walls were painted a soft yellow. The cabinet, the standing
mirror, and the chair and matching footstool were all made of darkly varnished
wood, with legs that curved inward slightly like a bowlegged sailor's. The only
other decoration was a framed needlepoint of an eagle atop a pole with its wings
spread. Noxy wondered idly if it was landing or taking off, or just shaking off
the rain.

"That's Her Highness's work," Dolly said, noticing Noxy's gaze. "She's a fine
one with a needle."

Noxy hesitated. "The prince told me she was..."  She trailed off, not knowing
exactly what to say.

"Simple?" Dolly finished, undisturbed. "She is that.  But she's as sweet as
anyone you'll ever meet. Now give me that arm and let me put some of this on
you. It won't hurt.  Pilots know I've done it often enough for Her
Highness---it's a rare week she doesn't have some spill or other."

Noxy was thankful that Dolly left her alone to dress in the pale yellow blouse
and gray floor-length skirt that a housemaid had delivered while she was
soaking. The skirt felt drafty---mountain women only wore them for weddings,
funerals, and fancies---but when she wiped steam from the mirror to look at
herself, the clothes' soft colors set off her dark brown skin perfectly.

She dithered for a moment before setting aside the dainty wooden court shoes
that had come with the clothes. *No sense breaking my neck on the stairs,* she
told herself as she pulled on her sturdy mountain boots instead.  After tying
her braids back in a thick club, she set out to see what she could find to quiet
her grumbling stomach.

The dining room on the floor below had the largest window Noxy had ever seen.  A
dozen places were set at the table that stood in front of it, each with a
bewildering confusion of bamboo and silver cutlery.

Prince Thokmay folded the report he had been reading and tucked it back into his
sleeve as she entered.  "Good evening, *sra*," hse said solemnly, bowing.  Noxy
hesitated, not knowing if she was supposed to bow back, but then Thokmay winked.

She scowled to hide her blush.  "Don't be such a troll."

"Why not?" asked a voice behind her.  "I think it's a fine thing to be."

Noxy spun around.  The troll who had just entered the room sketched an elaborate
court bow.  A small pair of glasses with heavy brass rims perched precariously
on his tiny snub of a nose. His orange jacket was just a shade lighter than his
fur, while his brown pants were just a shade darker.

The prince cleared his throat.  "Um, Probably Noxious of Stale, allow me to
present my tutor, the Learned Mope."

"A pleasure to meet you, honored---the prince has spoken of you often," the
troll said, smiling pleasantly.

"Learned Mope is Dolly's son," Prince Thokmay explained to Noxy, his voice
cracking mid-sentence. "He's supposed to be teaching me law and history."

"He's actually not a bad student," the troll told Noxy in a stage whisper. "He
has a fine memory. He just don't know how to think yet. Logic!  Logic is the
key." He waggled a finger.  "Logic and eloquence.  And facts, of course.  One
must have facts as fuel for one's arguments..."

Noxy tried to seem interested as the troll embarked on a long story about how an
inspired bit of logic by someone she had never heard of had once prevented a war
between two countries she was pretty sure no longer existed.  It became harder
after the steward stole the prince away with an urgent question about salad
dressings and the placement of lanterns.

As Mope's stored rambled toward a climax, another figure slipped into the room
and made a beeline for the sweets on the side table beneath the window.  She
wore a more elaborate version of the blouse and skirt that Noxy had been given,
and had the prince's round face and prince's, but instead of being cropped
close, her hair hung in a dozen long braids, each ending in a small yellow bow.

"You've met Her Highness, I trust?"  the troll asked, interrupting himself
without missing a beat.

"I'm afraid I haven't," Noxy replied, trying to imitate the polite voice her
mother used when negotiating contracts.

"Well, no point standing on ceremony," Mope said.  He shooed her forward. "Your
Highness?"

The princess shook her head as they approached, counting slowly.  "Four, five,
six---there are six people for dinner tonight!" she announced proudly.

The troll straightened his glasses.  "Quite possibly, Your Highness, though
logically the most we can conclude is that there will be *at most* six people.
But no matter, no matter," he added hastily as she frowned.  "Have you met the
Honored Noxious? She's a friend of your brother."

"H'lo," the princess mumbled, suddenly shy.

"Hello, Your Highness," Noxy said. The silence stretched awkwardly.  As Mope
opened his mouth to break it, Noxy asked, "Do you always wear nice shoes?"

Princess Ogmin looked at her feet. Her wooden court shoes were dark blue with
golden roses chasing one another across the top. "No?"  Princess Ogmin said,
still shy.

"Me neither," Noxy told her. She tugged her skirt up to reveal the toes of her
scuffed mountain boots. "I was afraid I'd trip and fall down the stairs if I
wore nice shoes, so I wore these instead."

The princess's eyes widened. She giggled. "Look!" she whispered loudly to Mope,
pointing.  "She's wearing *boots*!"

The troll grinned. "Yes she is," he agreed.  "And very nice boots they are,
wouldn't you say?"

After that, Princess Ogmin couldn't stop talking. By the time Sergeant Gyalpa
arrived to rescue the prince from the steward, she had told Noxy about her
riding boots, her dolls, and the needlework she was making for her brother's
birthday. ("But don't tell him," Princess Ogmin whispered loudly, "It's a
secret.")

---

The steward returned a few moment later to announce that the Consul of Chaghan
had arrived with her replacement, and was begging the prince's grace to join the
court for dinner.  "The court?"  Noxy asked in a whisper after Mope excused
himself.

The prince gestured at his sister, who had gone shy again as soon as the steward
spoke.  "Whenever two members of the royal family are in the same place, it's a
court."

"Her Excellence, Yisu Chaghan-o Consul," the steward said loudly.  Noxy glanced
at the door.  Her blood instantly went cold.

"It can't be..." she whispered.  She grabbed the prince's arm.
"Thokmay... look!"  The prince looked where she was pointing.  The smile dropped
off his face like a hanged man dropping from a gallows.

"Your Highness!"  The portly woman striding toward them with a practiced smile
on her face wore a formal black coat trimmed in Chaghan's sky blue, held closed
by a matching sash.  Her smile faltered slightly when she realized the prince
was ignoring her.  "Is something wrong?"

"What---what in the name of all things rotten is *he* doing here?" the prince
demanded, his voice breaking.

The room seemed to still as the man who had entered two paces behind the consul
bowed deeply.  "Your Highness.  How good to see you again."  Prince Shudarga
straightened and turned to Noxy.  "And you as well, Honored Noxious.  I trust
you are well."

"I---I take it you've met?" Consul Yisu asked weakly, her eyes darting back and
forth between the two princes like a rabbit caught between two lions.

"Yes," Prince Thokmay grated. "He murdered a friend of mine."

Prince Shudarga coughed.  "Not that I wish to begin my tenure as consul by
disagreeing with my host, but Sergeant Dorbu's death was not murder."

"Not murder!?"  "Consul!?"  Noxy and Prince Thokmay exclaimed at the same time.

"How can you be consul? You're not Chaghan-o!" the prince continued.

"I am now," Prince Shudarga replied calmly.  "The Chaghan-o very graciously
allowed me to take up land there after your father seized my holdings in Gandan.
When Consul Yisu decided to retire, offering my services as her replacement
seemed the least I could do to thank them."

If Noxy had been raised at court like Prince Thokmay, she might have noticed the
angry look that briefly flitted across Consul Yisu's face when Prince Shudarga
said she had decided to retire.  As it was, she was too angry to notice
anything, not even the way Manpa and Jinpa had slipped into the room to stand
casually by the door, very definitely *not* ready to draw their swords at the
first hint of trouble.

"The least you could do?" the prince snarled.  "The least you could do is find a
cliff like the one you threw Sergeant Dorbu off and take a flying leap!"

Prince Shudarga sighed theatrically.  "I did not throw the sergeant off
anything, Your Highness.  We were fighting.  It was difficult terrain, and he
fell.  I'm sorry it happened.  I'm sorry for every single person or Gifted beast
that died that day."

"Sorry enough to come back to Stale for trial?" Noxy burst out.

Prince Shudarga shook his head.  "I very much doubt I would receive a fair
hearing if I did so."

"A fair---you don't deserve any kind of hearing!  Let *go* of me!"  Noxy shook
off the hand Prince Thokmay had put on her arm.

"Noxy!" the prince said sharply.  He held up the cream-colored sheet of paper
that Consul Yisu had handed to the steward, who had in turn passed it to Prince
Thokmay.  "Noxy, I'm sorry, but he's telling the truth.  He really is the new
consul."

Noxy stared at him incredulously.  "But---he killed Sergeant Dorbu!"

The prince nodded, his face years older than it had been just minutes ago.  "I
know he did.  But as long as he's officially a guest of the king, Gandan-o law
can't touch him."

"Thank you, Your Highness."  Prince Shudarga's hair was starting to gray, Noxy
noticed, and he was thinner than he had been two years ago.  She hoped it was
more than just age.  She hoped those two years had been as hard for him as
they'd been for Fernando, whose broken leg had healed crookedly, or for
Ulfmaerr, who had given up so much of himself to help her and Prince Thokmay
escape.  She hoped he had nightmares, like she sometimes still did.

From his post beside the table, the steward rang a small bell.  "Dinner is
served," he announced.

Prince Thokmay didn't move.  "My apologies, Honored Yisu," he said, "But I
find I am suddenly feeling unwell.  I don't think I would be able to make it
through dinner."

"Of course, Your Highness," the Chaghan-o replied, "I completely understand.
Perhaps I could come and bid you farewell before I depart?"

"It would be my pleasure."  She and Prince Thokmay bowed to each other.

"And I trust you will enjoy your stay in Apple Bridge, *Consul*," Thokmay said
to his other guest in a voice as cold as a mountain lake.

Prince Shudarga inclined his head.  "I hope so, Your Highness.  I sincerely hope
so."

Sergeant Gyalpa had been standing at attention near one end of the dinner table
throughout the exchange.  The moment the door closed behind the two visitors and
the apologetic steward, he took a deep breath and blew it out through his
mustache.  "Sir, if I may---"

"You may not," Prince Thokmay snapped.

"But sir, I---"

The prince rounded on him.  "That man killed my friend!" he shouted, angry tears
welling in his eyes.  "He terrorized Noxy's village, and more than that, he
raised rebellion against my father.  What is Chaghan thinking!?  It is an insult
for them to appoint him as consul!"

"Yes sir," Sergeant Gyalpa said steadily.  "That's what I was going to say, sir.
It's an insult, and not an accidental one, and if I may, sir, I think you
handled it very well."

The prince blinked, nonplussed.  "Um.  Yes.  Thank you, sergeant."

Princess Ogmin eventually broke the silence that followed.  "Are we still going
to have pie?" she asked hesitantly, then look startled when everyone laughed.

In the end they agreed it would be a shame to waste the kitchen's hard work, and
Prince Thokmay declared that he was feeling much better.  The house staff served
spicy squash soup and skewers crowded with grilled vegetables and salty cubes of
cheese.  The pie that followed was delicious.

Afterward, Prince Thokmay sent his sister gently off to bed.  "Would you like to
sit on the balcony for a bit?"  he asked Noxy once she was gone.  "I'm sure the
cook would be happy to mull some cider."

The balcony turned out to be as wide as the house Noxy shared with her mother
back in Stale. The Trout River stretched away to the left and the right, up
toward the magic dam and down through Gandan and Latter Tongsa to the sea.
Moonlight gleamed on each little ripple, and suddenly Noxy missed the million
sharp stars of the mountain sky.

A bell went *dong, dong, dong* slowly somewhere on the other side of the river.
"Third watch," the prince observed, sliding a little lower in his chair.
"Sergeant Gyalpa had me do night watches when we first got here, just so I'd
know what it was like for the soldiers.  It was actually kind of fun---turns out
it's a lot easier getting up in the middle of the night than getting out of bed
in the morning."

"We take turns sleeping when we're on long flights," Noxy told him.  "As long as
a couple of people are awake to keep the herd moving, the rest will follow."

"Are you enjoying it?" Thokmay asked.

Noxy smiled.  "Lots."  She hesitated.  "And---how about you?  Are you
enjoying... this?"

The prince raised his mug to his lips, then lowered it without drinking.
"Actually, after I got back to Gandan, I thought for a while about becoming a
doctor."

"A doctor?" Noxy said. "But---you're a boy!"

"Boys can be doctors," the prince said defensively.  "Anyway, my father said
that one more doctor more or less probably wouldn't make much difference in the
world.  So here I am, learning how to command soldiers and argue the law."

"Do you ever regret what you did?" Noxy asked. She'd wanted to ask in her
letters, but had never known how to.

"No, not really." He sounded distant, as if they were talking about someone he
had lost touch with long ago. "It needed to be done. That's really all there is
to it.  But I think it's hard for Ogmin. She's not... she's not very good with
things changing. The first month we were here, she had to sleep in my room. She
kept waking up in the middle of the night because she couldn't hear the bell in
Queen Zhimi's Tower ringing."

"But why is she here? Isn't it dangerous?"

"It needed to be done," the prince said again. "If you send one royal away, it
looks like exile.  Send two, and you can call it a court."

"But---"

"My father *says* that her presence is a sign of the trust he puts in his oldest
son. I wonder sometimes, though." The prince drained his cider. "I don't
feel---I don't feel like I'm ready for that kind of trust, not really."

Noxy was silent. Finally Prince Thokmay sighed. "I'm sorry. It's been a long
day, and I still have a letter to write. Do you really want to go to the Dog
Market with Ogmin tomorrow? You don't have to if you don't want to."

"Oh, I think we'll have fun," Noxy said. "I just hope Dolly can keep up with
us."  She drained the last of her cider and stood.

The prince hurriedly stood as well.  They looked at each other, neither quite
knowing what to do next, until the prince cleared his throat.  "So, good night."

"Good night," Noxy said awkwardly.  Her breath caught when the prince reached
out, but he was only opening the door to let her back into the garrison house.
"Good night," she repeated, turning and leaving him on the balcony with all the
moment's might-have-beens.

*Meanwhile, on the other side of the garrison house, a hairy hand unlatched a
window.  Its owner waited a moment to see if anyone had noticed, but only heard
the usual sounds of servants finishing late-night chores, soldiers gossipping as
they stood watch, and a cat meowing to be let in.*

*Climbing onto the roof took only a moment.  A long leap ending in a practiced
reach and flip, and the troll was across the street and away...*

*A few minutes later, a piebald horse was awakened by a gentle hand stroking her
flank. "Sh, sh," whispered a voice. "Oh, look what they've done to you." Enraged
and embarrassed after the scene in the market, her owner had laid into her
flanks with his willow switch, leaving a double dozen angry welts.*

*She whinnied softly as her midnight visitor slipped a halter over her
head. "Sh, sh...  Quietly now, come along."  She followed obediently as the
troll led her out of the stable behind the inn where her bruised master had
found a room for the night.*

*The inn's yard was empty, though voices could be heard from inside.  Only the
stars, the scarred moon, and an attentive crow watched the pair make their way
across the inn's little courtyard to a muddy alley.*

*As they reached it, the crow swooped low over their heads.  The horse
side-stepped, startled.  "Sorry!" the crow squawked.*

*"Sh!" the troll hissed.*

*"Sorry," the crow repeated more quietly.  "There's a couple of night-soil
collectors along down Trumpet Street, but that's all."*

*"Thank you." The crow bobbed its head and took wing again, fluttering from
building to building as the troll and the horse picked their way through the
alley to a run-down warehouse on the banks of the Trout.*

*The carefully-oiled hinges of the warehouse's door made no more sound than the
window latch had.  Inside, a cheap dayglass lantern cast just enough
reddish-orange light to reveal a pair of raccoons and---*

*The horse shied again as the bear rose to its feet and ambled toward her.  "Sh,
sh, sh..."  The troll stroked her muzzle.  "It's all right, it's all right,
nobody's going to hurt you, not here, not ever."*

*"You know she doesn't understand you," the bear rumbled.*

*"She understands what I mean," the troll replied sharply.  "The barge is still
coming in tomorrow?"*

*"If it hasn't sunk.  Or been pirated.  Or caught fire."  The bear stepped aside
to let the troll lead the horse to the back of the warehouse where half a bag of
pilfered oats waited for her.  The raccoons stood on their hind legs and pushed
the door closed.*

*The troll stroked the horse's muzzle one last time.  "Don't worry.  No one is
ever going to put a halter on you again."  Without waiting for an answer that
would never come, the hairy figure climbed a post, swung along a beam, and
disappeared out a window into the night.  The air was chill, and morning would
arrive all too soon, but there was one more chore to be done...*

As the crow tucked its head under its wing on a rafter above the horse, Prince
Thokmay was sitting down at his desk.  He had unbuttoned his dress jacket but
kept it on for warmth---the light from the little dayglass lantern by his elbow
was midday-yellow, but held no heat at all.

He frowned at the sheet of paper before him.  *Your Majesty,* his letter began,
as his reports to his father always did. *1.  Apple Bridge continues quiet. The
Dog Market is busy, but your revenue collectors report only minor disputes and
disturbances.* He saw no reason to mention Mope's latest run-in with the locals.

*2. The tornado has struck again. No soldiers' lives were lost, but one man is
still missing, and a prosperous smallholding was destroyed.  There is still no
clue who is directing it.* The prince had hesitated before calling the little
out-of-the-way farm "prosperous". He didn't think that his father's hawk-eyed
accountants would quibble over the shells that the prince was planning to spend
to rebuild it, but Mope always told him to think two moves ahead.

*3. A Stale cloud was injured in the same attack. Its rider is to remain here
with it until it is able to rejoin its herd.* He had almost chewed the end off
his quill writing those two sentences.  After what had happened two years ago,
he doubted his father would be happy knowing that Noxy was staying at the
garrison house.  He wanted his brother to find out even less. The first time
Noxy had written Thokmay a letter, Thokmay had run through the palace holding it
in the air, crowing, "Thokmay has a sweetheart!  Thokmay has a sweetheart!"  The
older prince had knocked over a potted lime tree and two elderly surveyors
catching up with him, and had his riding privileges taken away for a week for
blacking his eye. Thokmay had made a point of sneering at cloudherds ever since.

He sighed, then froze as something else sighed behind him.  His right hand was
on the writing desk, holding the goose quill.  *Breathe naturally,* he told
himself as he slid his left hand up from his knee (which he often scratched
while writing) to the dagger at his belt. Slowly, slooowwwllyyy...

Something thumped onto the floor behind him.  The prince leaped to his feet,
knocking over his chair as he drew his dagger.  The ghost of a small dog looked
at him for a moment, then threw back his head and howled.

The sound went through the prince like an arrow. He clapped his hands over his
ears, nearly taking off his nose with his dagger as the lantern on his desk
shattered.

The ghost lowered its head and growled, ears back. The prince yelped and slashed
instinctively as the apparition suddenly charged. His whole body went cold for
an instant as the ghost passed through him and disappeared through the wall.

The prince collapsed onto the edge of his desk, shivering uncontrollably.  His
dagger slipped from his numb fingers and clattered on the floor.

The door burst open a moment later. "Your Highness!"  Someone shook him. "Your
Highness, are you all right?"

"I'm fine," Prince Thokmay mumbled. He let out his breath with a whoosh,
half-expecting to see it make a fog. "It was Edward. He was here."

"Pilots preserve us."  The servant let go of the prince's shoulders.  Was his
name Apsu? The prince couldn't remember, though he prided himself on knowing
names.  He was so... tired...

More boots pounded the planked stone corridor. "Your Highness, are you all
right?"  Sergeant Dambu asked before pulling herself up short and sniffing the
air. "There's been a ghost here," she said flatly.

The prince nodded. "I know," he mumbled, still shivering.  Disconnected thoughts
and images were surfacing in his mind like drowned bodies rising to the surface
of a stagnant pond.  He choked back nausea.  "I think---I think he's trying to
warn us about something."

"About what, Your Highness?"  *Abasu,* the prince recalled fuzzily.  *The
servant's name is Abasu.* He shook his head.  The images---they weren't his
memories, they were the ghost's, and they were all the wrong shape and size and
flavor.  Thinking about them was like trying to choke down cold cauliflower
soup...

"Make way."  Sergeant Gyalpa pushed past the servants.  He was wearing only his
boots and a striped cotton nightshirt, but had his sword in his hand. "Your
Highness, are you---"

"It was Edward," Sergeant Dambu told him.  "He passed along through His
Highness."  She picked up a shard of dayglass from the desk and turned it over
in her hand.  "He's getting stronger."

Sergeant Gyalpa scowled. "Back to your posts," he ordered the servants and
soldiers. "Nothing more is going to happen here tonight."

He waited until they were gone before putting his hand on the prince's shoulder.
"If you need to yark, lad, go ahead.  Most do, their first time along this
sort."

Prince Thokmay shook his head, feeling merely dizzy instead of seasick.  The
thoughts the ghost had left behind in his head were fading.  "I think..." He
swallowed.  "It's something about the bridge.  Or the dam.  And the Blight.
Something bad is coming."  He stood, then grabbed the desk with one hand to
steady himself.  "Something *really* bad."

"Omens blasted omens," Sergeant Gyalpa cursed. "Why can't he just come along and
tell us straight?"

"I'm so more worried as that he's coming clearer instead of fading," Sergeant
Dambu said, still turning the shard of dayglass over in her hand.  Her voice,
soft and husky, seemed at odds with her skinny frame.  "Should have moved along
ages since, before we were either born.  Why's he coming stronger?  And how?"

Prince Thokmay straightened up. "Whatever is giving him the strength to stay in
this world can't bode well for this town. I'll include a note to my father's
magicians in my letter and ask for advice." He took a deep breath and let it out
with a whoosh. "I'll do that now.  It's not like I'm going to get to sleep any
time soon.  And Sergeant Dambu---let's speak first thing in the morning.  It
appears we have more to talk about than just what you found on your last
patrol." He returned the two sergeants' salutes and good nights, swept the
still-glowing dayglass into a pile in the corner of his desk, and fell back into
his chair.

He could feel the long day dragging down his eyelids as he added a scribbled
summary of what had happened to his letter and signed, *Your dutiful son,
Thokmay Gandan-o Prince* below it.  He knew he should re-read it, but instead he
drew a line diagonally across the empty space at the bottom of the page, folded
it into thirds, stumbled to his bed, kicked off his boots, and was asleep by his
third breath.
