# Extreme

## Greg Wilson

Fade in: to a man climbing an icy cliff face in moonlight.  There is
frost in his beard and mustache, and sweat on his face.  He is wearing
a black jacket and leggings made of some padded high-tech material.
His climbing is almost rhythmic: a hand takes a new hold and tests its
solidity, then a foot moves, then the other hand and the other foot.

Suddenly one foot slips.  A rock shifts, and the other foot comes
free.  His body dangles for a moment.  He brings his leg up, finds a
new purchase---and both hands come free.  He falls without a sound,
arms and legs flailing in a vain attempt to find purchase.  The camera
follows him down, moving slightly slower than his fall so that he
seems to drop in slow motion.  As he disappers from view a deep male
voice says, "Shit."

Fade in again: to a mottled screenful of black and white.  The focus
slowly sharpens.  Just as we realize that we're looking at an icy
cliff face in bright daylight, a hand reaches up from the bottom of
the screen and grabs a small protrusion.  The rest of the climber
follows; he is wearing high-tech thermals and mirrored sunglasses.  He
has a snowboard strapped to his back; the black plastic garbage bag
that's been wrapped around it rustles in the wind.

Cut to: a side view of the climber, half-way up a steep (but not
vertical) rock face, moving steadily, methodically toward the top

Cut to: a field of snow, ending abruptly, beyond which are mountains
and a painfully blue sky.  A hand reaches over the edge, then another.
The climber pulls himself up onto the snowfield with a grunt, then
lies there, sweating, panting, gulping for air.  He sits up, pulls a
cloth from his jacket pocket, then takes off his sunglasses to wipe
his face.  It's JEFF.  His face has the pained look of someone who's
just pushed themselves to their limit, and a little bit further.

He blows his nose noisily, then grins suddenly.  Stuffing the cloth
back into his pocket, he unstraps the snowboard he's been carrying.  A
moment later, he's off down the mountainside with a whoop.  Watching
him from behind, we see him swerve and dodge through a handful of
trees, then go into a high-speed crouch on a groomed ski slope,
whizzing past grandmothers in pink jackets and kids in snowbunny suits
and funny hats.

Cut to: the bottom of the ski slope.  People are milling about, trying
to get in line for the lifts or looking for friends.  Jeff snowplows
to a stop beside three people, all of them, like him, in their
mid-twenties.

FIRST SKIER: "Hey, slide! You been up Moccasin yet?"

JEFF (hands on knees, winded for a moment, then straightening up, the
grin still in place): "Nope." He gulps air.  "'S my first run today."

FIRST SKIER (good-natured): "Slacker! C'mon, Boz 'n' Munge said it's
one hundred up there."

Jeff nods; the foursome ski or snowboard toward one of the lift lines.
The camera follows them, then pauses, letting them go out of sight.
There, standing at the rail on the ski lodge verandah, we see two
middle-aged men in nondescript winter jackets.  The first, MCFADDYEN,
is scanning the mountainside with binoculars.  The second, KRZEZINSKI,
has lowered his binoculars, and is watching Jeff and his friends
expressionlessly.

Cut to: the bar of a cut-price ski hotel somewhere in the British
Columbia Rockies.  The tables are scarred, the walls are covered with
posters of people skiing, snowboarding, climbing.  Jeff is sitting
with a dozen male and female friends.  The other men are grungier than
he is.  One of them, Munge, has blonde Viking hair, a Celtic tattoo on
his forearm, and an eyebrow ring.  The women range from a beautiful
East Indian with dreadlocks to a pale, muscular white girl with
intense eyes and bleached hair.  A mediocre band is on the small stage
in the bar.

LEAD SINGER: "OK, uh, here's one I'm sure you all know." The band
starts a thrash version of The Entertainer.

MUNGE (gets up and starts singing): "Na na na naaa, na naaa, na naaa."
Everyone joins in.  Munge does a partial strip-tease while the others
clap and laugh.  Jeff is laughing and clapping with the others, but he
keeps glancing at Joey, a tanned woman with blonde-on-black hair.

The song finishes.  Munge pulls his shirt back on as he sits down,
bumps Jeff's beer with his elbow in the process.  Jeff catches it
before it spills---he's quick---says, "Hey!"

MUNGE: "Hey, sorry, guy.  So whaddaya think?" he asks the table at
large, then scoops his hands up under his pecs to make boobs.  "If I
shaved? Huh? You think I could make a living at this?" His grin is
infectious; people laugh.

JEFF (to Joey): "So, did you get up Moccasin?"

JOEY: "What?"

JEFF: "Did you do Moccasin today?"

JOEY: "Uh, yeah, couple of times.  The top was kind of icy, though.  I
kept losing it on the turns."

JEFF: "Yeah, I heard you couldn't get an edge in wordwise."

MUNGE (just as Jeff ends, so that Joey doesn't have time to respond to
his pun): "You guys talking about Moccasin? What a fucking rip-off
that was." Swallows a mouthful of beer.  "Best run today was down the
side off Black Bear.  There's that drop, the first twenty feet, then
you're on powder the whole way."

JOEY: "It's more like twenty yards, that drop, isn't it?"

MUNGE: "Feet, yards..." Waves dismissively, looking at her with a
knowing grin on his face.  "Women are so hung up on measurement all
the time." Joey dips her fingers in her beer, flicks it at him.

JEFF (under his breath, but so that Munge and Joey can hear): "Yeah,
and guys are so hung up on bullshit."

MUNGE (rolls his eyes at Joey, speaks to Jeff): "So where were you all
day? Feeb said he saw you coming down the bunny run off Handy."

JEFF (nods, swallows his beer): "Yeah, kind of.  I did the back face
of the hill last summer with some guys, wanted to try it again.  Comes
out about half-way up to the top of the lift, I just boarded back
down."

JOEY (a little more respect in her voice): "You climbed up there?"

JEFF: "Yeah.  Beautiful day, you could see all the way down to
Fowler."

JOEY: "Wow, that's kind of extreme."

MUNGE: "Yeah, well, but that way you only get in a couple of runs a
day, right? You really want to tone your thighs," he looks
meaningfully at Joey, "You gotta do, like, five runs an hour, all of
'em nineties.  Now that's extreme." Jeff opens his mouth to rebut, but
doesn't get a chance.

OFFSCREEN VOICE: "Puppy shit.  What the fuck would you know about
extreme?"

Cut to: wider shot of the bar.  Everyone at Jeff's table looks over at
the next table.  Krzezinski and McFaddyen are sitting there with a
half-empty pitcher of beer, a bottle of vodka, and the look of men
who've been drinking in anger.  McFaddyen is looking down at the
table, shaking his head slightly.  Krzezinski seems angry.

MUNGE (to no-one in particular): "Yeah, you know, I remember when I
had my first beer." He gulps a mouthful from the bottle in his hand
and starts to turn back to his companions.

KRZEZINSKI (louder): "You hear me? I said 'puppy shit'.  Or are you
ears as useless as your balls?"

MUNGE: "Hey, just fuck off, OK? Go drive a Saab or something."

Krzezinski gets up, bottle in hand, and comes over to the
snowboarders.  "You think you're extreme?" he says to Munge
derisively.  "'S fuckin' puppy shit is what it is.  You're fuckin'
full of puppy shit if you think that's extreme." He appears to be
drunk.

MUNGE (amused and sneering slightly for effect): "Uh huh.  And you're
like the Lyle Lovett of extreme, is that it?"

KRZEZINSKI (puts the bottle down on the table, leaving his hand there
to steady himself, and leans over slightly.  He has a street
preacher's eyes, and the voice of a born officer, or salesman):
"Extreme's when you can't stop, puppy boy," he says.  "You think
slidin' down some hill on your ass is extreme? Fuck it is.  You could
stop any time you wanted, couldn't you? You could just put up your
hand and say, Uhhh, I wanna go home now.  That's not extreme.
Extreme's when the only way out is through the other fucking side." He
jabs his finger at Munge to emphasize his last few words.

MUNGE: "Oh, hey, that's deep." Looks around at his companions.
"Somebody get me a pen or something, let me write this down." Looks
back at Krzezinski, still not taking him seriously.  "So what do you
do that's so extreme?"

KRZEZINSKI: "You want to see extreme?" He pulls back his sweater
sleeve, then, in one smooth, much-practiced move, brushes back his
jacket and pulls out a folding knife, as if by magic, from somewhere
at his back.

INTENSE WHITE GIRL (as the knife appears, without slowing down
Krzezinski's act): "Oh Jesus."

KRZEZINSKI: "This is extreme." He draws the knife across his arm,
making a long, shallow cut.  The blood wells up immediately.  He
reverses the knife and offers it to Munge.  Munge rears back, hands
raised palms-forward as if he's being held up.  "What's the matter?"
Krzezinski sneers.  "I hardly broke the skin.  Even you must've done
worse some time.  Go ahead, take it."

Munge freezes.  As Krzezinski snorts and starts to turn away, Jeff
reaches out and grabs his wrist.  Krzezinski freezes.  The white girl
(clearly reliving some private nightmare) says, "Oh Jesus," again very
softly as Jeff takes the knife from Krzezinski.  Jeff doesn't hesitate
or show any fear or give himself time to think the better of it: he
just cuts his arm.  He and Krzezinski stare at each other.

MUNGE (breaking the moment, trying to regain the focus of attention):
"Fuck sake, you crazy? He could have AIDS or something."  No-one pays
any attention.

Jeff hands the knife back to Krzezinski.  Krzezinski closes it one
handed and makes it disappear behind his back, then half-grins,
half-snarls and picks up the vodka bottle to hand it to Jeff.  Jeff is
suddenly uncertain: he hesitates just a microsecond before starting to
pour the vodka onto the wound.

KRZEZINSKI (grabbing the bottle, laughing): "Hey, shit, what are you
doing? This is the good stuff!" He picks up a shot glass from the
table, wipes it clean with his shirt-tail in a single smooth gesture,
then pours it full and hands it to Jeff.  Jeff is a bit flushed,
clearly excited by what he's done, maybe a little bit drunk, all of a
sudden uncertain as the adrenalin wears off.  He knocks the shot back.

KRZEZINSKI (nods his head slowly, then suddenly looks at Munge and
says): "It's like that." He goes back to his table.  McFaddyen takes
the bottle from him and sets it ostentatiously on the side of the
table furthest from him.

The snowboarders all start babbling at once.  The East Indian girl
with the dreadlocks has her arm around the intense white girl, who has
covered her face with her hands and seems to be having very controlled
hysterics.

JOEY: "Jeff.  Jeff!" He looks up at her, suddenly back in real time.
"Here, put this on your arm." She hands him a handful of paper
napkins.  He presses them to his arm.

JEFF (wincing): "Ow, fuck." He pulls the napkins away and looks
accusingly around the table.  "Who had vinegar on their fries?" He
stands up.  "I'd better get this cleaned up," he says, suddenly back
to his usual white-bread self.  After a quick glance at Munge, Joey
stands up as well and follows him up the stairs.

Cut to: the band on stage.  The lead singer mumbles something to one
of the guitarists, then turns back to the mike and says: "OK, uh,
here's another one I'm sure you all know." They start playing a thrash
version of the James Bond theme.

Cut to: Jeff lying in bed, staring at the ceiling with a sleepy smile
on his face.  He is in a bare-bones ski lodge room.  Pearly light is
coming in through the curtains.  We can see a neat bandage on his
forearm.  Someone pounds on the door and shouts, "Hey, skinny dogs!
Surf's up!" The toilet flushes and Joey comes out of the bathroom
wearing a t-shirt and lycra shorts.  Jeff pulls back the covers to
make space for her.

JOEY (sitting on the edge of the bed instead): "Have you looked
outside yet?" she asks, pulling on a sweater and hunting around for
her socks.  "Must've been two inches overnight."

JEFF (slyly): "Dunno why you'd get so excited about two inches."

Joey smiles briefly, still dressing.  "Where's my watch? Oh." She gets
up and goes back into the bathroom, comes out a moment later.

JEFF (sitting up, suddenly plaintive): "Hey, when are you heading
out?"

JOEY: "Soon as I can, why? It looks gorgeous out there."

JEFF: "No, I mean when are you, when are you out of here?"

JOEY (distracted): "Um, I dunno.  Have you seen my bum bag?" She goes
back into the bathroom; we hear her rooting around.

JEFF sighs, then throws back the covers and sits up to start dressing.
He has fresh scratches on his back.

JOEY (coming out of the bathroom): "So see you up top, OK?"

JEFF: "Hey! Can I give you a call some time?"

JOEY (pausing at the door, a politely-distant smile on her face):
"Yeah, sure."

JEFF: "So, uh, what's your number?"

JOEY (amused, and a little disdainful): "I wrote it down for you last
night, remember? Bye!" She's gone.

Jeff thinks for a moment, then closes his eyes and winces.  He twists
around to try to look at his right ass cheek.  We can see two or three
digits written shakily in ballpoint.

Cut to: Jeff opening the door to leave his room, startled to find
McFaddyen there.

MCFADDYEN: "Boss wants to have a word with you."

JEFF: "What did I do?"

MCFADDYEN: "You didn't do anything.  Boss just wants to have a word.
Half past twelve on the deck for lunch." He walks away without waiting
for an answer.

Cut to: Jeff snowboarding.  He's good, but snarling a bit as he hops
through some moguls; it's hard to tell if he's angry at something, or
just having fun.  He reaches the bottom of the hill, swooshes to a
stop, checks his watch, looks up at the mountain, looks at the ski
lodge, scoots over to get in line for one more run.

In front of him, two small boys (brothers?) are squabbling.  The
younger is saying, "Leamme 'lone," while the older feather-punches him
in the face and ribs.  Finally the older one plants a hand in the
younger one's chest and pushes him over.  The younger one's face
screws up as if he's about to cry.

JEFF (a pumped-up look still on his face from snowboarding, taps the
older boy on the shoulder, says softly): "Hey." When the older boy
turns around, Jeff half-squats so that their faces are only an inch
apart and starts barking like an angry dog.  The older boy takes a
step back in fright and trips over his own skis.

JEFF (straightens up, looks at the younger boy who has just stood back
up, nods his head toward the lift): "C'mon, it's our turn."

YOUNGER BOY (suddenly furious, starts flailing Jeff's legs with
ineffective fists): "You lay off my brother! You lay off my brother!"

Cut to: Jeff and Krzezinski sitting down to lunch.  They are at a
wooden picnic table on the verandah of the ski lodge.  Both have
bright orange trays bearing the usual burger, fries, and bottled beer.
They take everything off their trays, then stack the trays out of the
way on the side of the table.  Both tuck into their food, not
speaking.

JEFF (after a few mouthfuls of silence): "So my brother told me once,
always let the other guy start the conversation."

KRZEZNISKI (snorts): "Smart man." Squirts ketchup from a foil envelope
onto his fries, then looks up at Jeff.  "So what are you doing with
the rest of your life?" he asks.

JEFF (can't help but smile): "That's a good start.  Direct, but
doesn't give anything away." He takes another mouthful, chews
thoughtfully, shrugs, swallows.  "Computers," he says.  "Same as now."
He hesitates, shrugs again.  "I'm on a help desk right now.  They pay
by the call, so I can take time off and come up here whenever I want."

KRZEZINSKI (shakes his head): "No, I mean, what are you doing with the
rest of your life? You're not gonna be on the help desk for the rest
of your life, are you?"

JEFF (slightly defensive, as if Krzezinski has hit a sensitive spot):
"I dunno, probably get into Web programming or something.  That's
where the money is." Shrugs.  "What I really like is being up here,
you know, climbing and skiing, but skiing for a living's a good way to
go hungry, even if you're good."

KRZEZINSKI (nods slowly): "Yup," he says.  "You can have a thrill, or
you can have a paycheck.  It's a shitty world." Changes tack.  "How
old are you, twenty-five? Twenty-six, something like that?" Jeff
starts to answer, but Krzezinski is still talking.  "When I was
twenty-six, I was selling cars for my uncle.  Just come back from
bein' a soldier---never saw action, no jungle time, just moving shit
from one pile to another---and there I was, selling cars.  My uncle'd
been in the business, I dunno, twenty years, got his start when he got
out after Korea.  Nice man---had a nice wife, a nice house, two nice
kids, fucked his secretary two or three times a week, and every once
in a while he'd get drunk and smash things."

KRZEZINSKI has apparently forgotten his food by this point.  "You know
what I mean? There'd be a shitty day, some yoyo would diddle him for a
whole afternoon over some rusted-out Ford, and Uncle Tad would smile
and tell him to come again, and then he'd open a bottle and start
smashing things.  The desk, the windows, the sink in the john, you
name it.  Never hit any people, not that I saw anyway, but he had the
cops in there maybe two or three times a year, bitching about how
there'd been another break-in and when were they going to catch these
fuckin' vandals?"

KRZEZINSKI (settling more comfortably into his chair): "So anyway, one
day I just said, 'Fuck it', and started smashing stuff too.  When he
finally passed out I took a set of keys, and four clean out of his
desk, and got the fuck out of there." Sniffs to clear his nose, then
picks up a napkin and wipes.  "You ever feel like doing that?"

JEFF (a bit taken aback): "Uh, sure.  I mean, everyone does, right?
Sometime?" Thinks for a second.  "'Specially the bit about his
secretary."

KRZEZINSKI (slumped down in his chair bonelessly at this point, both
hands on his beer bottle, which is resting on his stomach.  He looks
up at Jeff from under his brows): "So what are you going to do about
it?" He waves the beer bottle at the ski slopes.  "Puppy around out
here every couple of weekends until you start smashing things?"

JEFF (laughs suddenly): "You're still a used-car salesman, aren't
you?" He finishes his beer in one gulp.  "'Cept I guess it's not cars
any more, is it?"

KRZEZINSKI (grins): "Nope.  I'm in the hero business these days."  He
sips his beer, then puts it back on his belly and digs in his right
ear with his little finger.  "Lot of business for heroes," he says
reflectively, looking at whatever's now stuck to the end of his finger
before flicking it over the railing.  He looks at Jeff again.  "Lots
of guys in Washington or Langley wish they could be heroes, but
they're not allowed any more.  Congressional this and oversight that,
and meanwhile you've got twenty billion dollars worth of chemical
brainfuck coming into this country every year, and Russian warheads
turning up in Pakistan, and every fruitcake Gordon Liddy wannabe is
makin' moonshine out of fertilizer and fuel oil in his garage.  All
kinds of shit going on, every day, and the people who used to be in
charge of making sure it never boiled over have to spend all their
time filling in forms and telling fat-assed timeservers why they
really, really do need new pencils please sir."  Krzezinski raises his
beer, then puts it back on his belly untouched, looking like he wants
to spit.

Jeff opens his mouth to say something, but Krzezinski suddenly
straightens up and leans over the table on his elbows, the beer
clenched in one hand.  Unconsciously, Jeff leans forward on his elbows
as well.

KRZEZINSKI (confidingly): "That's where I come in.  No committees, no
puppy shit, nothing but heroes."

JEFF (skeptical): "You're a spy?"

KRZEZINSKI (snorts): "Fuck, no.  A spy's just some guy who makes one
extra carbon copy every time the Boogerstani assistant whatever orders
lunch.  No, I'm on what you'd call the, uh, pro-active side of things.
The extreme side," he adds meaningfully, settling back and putting his
beer back on his belly.

JEFF (fishes for a bit of food with his tongue under his upper lip,
thinking): "And you're telling me this because...?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Because I think you can do better with your life than the
help desk.  I think you can do better than bein' a straight man for
guys like that puppyshit upfuck last night with the bad haircut."  He
smiles suddenly and spreads his hand, a self-parody of a used-car
salesman.  "Good hours, good pay, lots of travel, and you get to kill
people," he says.  "Not many jobs offer all that."

JEFF: "Hm. Sounds like the sort of thing where you'd want someone
with, uh, prior experience.  You know, like rescuing the president's
daughter from terrorists, or something like that.  I mean, Russian
warheads turning up in Pakistan, that's real James Bond stuff."

KRZEZINSKI (waves a hand, swallowing a mouthful of cold fries): "Oh, I
made that bit up." [beat] "It was actually Thailand, and anyway,
someone had taken the triggers out." Keeps a straight face for a
moment, then grins, as if daring Jeff to believe him.  Then he's
serious again.  "You're right, experience is a good thing, but
attitude matters a lot more.  I want a guy who knows, I dunno,
explosives or tunnels or something, I can find one, but it's a lot
harder to find someone who's crazy enough to cut himself to get laid,
but not so crazy that he's talking to Jesus in the rear-view mirror,
you know what I mean?"

The corner of JEFF's mouth twitches.  "He usually rides up front.
It's part of that whole humility schtick, you know?" He takes a deep
breath.  "So what exactly is it you're offering? Just supposing I was
interested, and that, uh, you're not just talking to Jesus yourself."

KRZEZINSKI (grins): "Finish your lunch.  We'll take a walk."

Cut to: the interior of a good hotel room.  Krzezinski opens the
sliding glass door and steps out onto the balcony; Jeff follows.  They
are on the same mountain.  Krzezinski hands Jeff a pair of binoculars,
then points up the mountainside.

KRZEZINSKI: "Up there.  With the yellow jeep in front." Jeff raises
the binoculars and looks.  Looking through the lenses, we see a
single-story ski chalet, the yellow jeep, and then suddenly a
mustached man in his forties, wearing a parka jacket and sunglasses,
lighting a cigarette.  The man takes a drag on the cigarette, then
walks around the side of the house and out of our sight.  The camera
holds on the edge of a satellite dish for a few moments.

Cut to: Jeff watching a moment longer before lowering the binoculars.
He watches the lodge a moment with his eyes alone a moment longer,
then looks at Krzezinski.  "And...?"

KRZEZINSKI (turning to lean back against the balcony railing, looking
into the room rather than at Jeff): "Well, speaking hypothetically, so
as not to contravene laws prohibiting criminal conspiracy, I want
somebody to get up there and stick a microphone up their fucking ass."

JEFF (raises the binoculars again): "Uh huh.  And this is because...?"

KRZEZINSKI: "This is because we don't want the Israelis to get settled
in the same way the Mafia did back in the Thirties." He straightens
up, turns to lean his elbows on the railing, still not looking at
Jeff.  "Guy up there used to be a cop.  Some kinda military police,
spent twenty years playin' tag with the Arabs before deciding he'd
rather be in the private sector.  He's got a good crew, real
professionals.  Up here, though, he doesn't own the place, we figured
it was our only chance to find out what he's up to."

JEFF: "Wait a second --- you said 'Israeli'?"

KRZEZINSKI (a bit annoyed at being interrupted): "Yeah, as in, from
Israel."

JEFF (disdainful): "C'mon, Israelis can't be bad guys.  Something's
wrong with this."

KRZEZINSKI (pauses, blinks, then says a bit hotly): "What do you mean,
Israelis can't be bad guys?  Anyone can be a bad guy if he puts his
heart into it."

JEFF: "But that's ---"

KRZEZINSKI (losing his temper): "What, that's prejudiced?  Are you
saying I'm a bigot?  Would it be any more P.C.  if they were Italian
or Colombian or something?"

JEFF (slowly): "I guess not." Sighs.  Both are quiet for a moment,
then Jeff restarts the conversation: "So why didn't you bring a
climber with you?"

MCFADDYEN (stepping out onto the balcony): "We did." Krzezinski turns
quickly to look at him; McFaddyen shakes his head.  "'Bout half an
hour ago," he says.

KRZEZINSKI (slumps slightly): "Fuck." He turns around to stare back up
the mountainside.  "Fucking son of a bitch." Turns to Jeff, all humor
gone.  "Climber we had's been retired.  You understand? That skinny
bitch is only up here one more day; we wanna get anything worth
getting, we gotta get it now."

MCFADDYEN (after a moment of silence): "Or try again in Miami."

KRZEZINSKI: "Fuck Miami! Fuck the whole fucking city! He'll be in a
fucking hotel again, won't he?" Stares moodily at the snow.  "Gimme a
desk job and a secretary that can hold her breath for three minutes,
that's all I ask."

JEFF (after another pause): "So what do you want me to do?"

Cut to: an abstract jumble of gray and black.  All is still for a
moment, then a gloved hand suddenly pushes into our field of vision
horizontally from the left side of the screen.  Another hand follows
it, then Jeff's head and back.  The camera has been rotated through
ninety degrees, so he appears to be crawling sideways from left to
right.  He moves rhythmically: one foot finds a hold, then the
opposite hand gets its grip, then the other foot and hand move in
quick succession.  As the camera pulls out it spins until we are
looking straight down the mountain at the top of his head.  He is
wearing night vision goggles, but is otherwise dressed as he was in
the opening.  We see the lights and outline of the ski lodge below
him.

Cut to: bright daylight.  Jeff and Krzezinski are standing side by
side next to a big green 4x4, looking straight at us through the
telephoto lenses of a couple of professional-looking cameras.  They
lower their cameras simultaneously, then raise them again.

Cut to: a side shot of the same scene.  Jeff lowers his camera a
fraction ahead of Krzezinski this time.  "No way," he says.

KRZEZINSKI (exasperated): "Come on, it's only about twenty feet."

JEFF (shaking his head): "Uh uh.  Not without pins." He gestures by
jutting his chin in the direction they've been looking.  "And even
with pins, fuck, maybe you could do a swing like that in the movies,
but it'd make a fuck of a racket."

Cut to: Jeff on the mountainside at night.  He is resting for a
moment, his body pressed close against the mountainside like a
lover's.  He farts quietly in the stillness, then starts to move
again.

Cut to: Jeff and Krzezinski in daylight again, using their cameras as
telescopes.  The camera is behind them now, looking past their heads
at a cluster of private ski chalets.  The Israeli's is set higher on
the mountainside than any of the others, but is still a good fifty
feet or so away from the rock.

KRZEZINSKI sighs and raises his camera for another look.  "OK, so what
about coming at it from the other side?"

JEFF (decisive): "That's even worse.  You're sixty feet up, you're
forty feet back from the chalet, there's no overhang, no nothing.
Tarzan couldn't do it, OK?"

KRZEZINSKI (lowering his camera, looking at Jeff, slightly angry):
"You sure give up easily, don't you?"

Cut to: another close-up of the mountainside at night.  Jeff's hand
appears, then his head, then suddenly, with just a slight scraping
sound, his head drops and his arm extends.

Cut to: the same scene from ten feet out.  Jeff is hanging by his
hands; his feet are dangling, trying to find purchase.  After a second
one does, then the other.  He clings to the mountain, then farts again
(a little louder), and continues climbing.

Cut to: daylight again.  McFaddyen gets out of the 4x4 with a thermos;
he is wearing a Tilley hat with half-a-dozen badges sewn onto it along
with his parka and sunglasses.  Jeff looks at the hat inquisitively
when McFaddyen joins them.  "Birdwatching," McFaddyen says, a bit
defensively.  He hands the thermos to Krzezinski and, while Krzezinski
is opening it, pulls a pair of binoculars out of his parka pocket and
flicks the lens covers up.  "All different kinds of birds," McFaddyen
adds, scanning the mountainside slowly.  He reaches out his hand
without taking his eyes away from the binoculars; Krzezinski gives him
the thermos, and McFaddyen sips from it.

KRZEZINSKI (impatiently): "Well? You got something?"

MCFADDYEN: "Yup." He sips from the thermos again, then, with as much
of a smile as he'll ever wear, turns to the other two.  "We don't put
it on the house, we put it on the dish." All three raise their
respective viewing instruments simultaneously.

Cut to: a long shot at night of the satellite dish, mounted twenty
meters or so from the house, close to the cliff edge.  We can see the
top few meters of the cliff.  Vague shapes move behind the house
windows; there is faint music, and voices.  After a moment, Jeff
climbs into view, first one arm, then the other, inexorably working
his way up the mountain.

Cut to: a reverse shot of the cliff edge.  One hand reaches over, then
another, and Jeff pulls himself up into the snow, sweating and panting
(echoing the opening scenes).  He doesn't sit up this time, though; he
lies prone in the snow, then slowly raises his head and looks at the
house.

Cut to: an amplified night-vision shot of the house.  Everything is
greenish-white, and all the edges are thickened.  The camera (Jeff's
point of view) rises a meter or so.  It shakes from side to side as
Jeff scurries through the snow toward the satellite dish.  When it
drops back down to the ground, the dish assembly takes up the whole
screen, like a piece of abstract art.

We watch the same green-white shot as Jeff's hands undo the snap on
his bum bag, then sets it on the concrete base of the satellite dish
stand.  He inches the zipper open, wincing at the zzzzzrrrttt sound it
makes, then pulls out a multi-head screwdriver and a small cylindrical
object with a couple of loose leads.  He hunts around the dish for a
moment, then says, "Fuck it," very softly and pulls off the night
vision headset.

Cut to: A medium shot of Jeff reaching up under his jacket to pull out
a tiny flashlight.  He does his work with it in his left hand,
flicking it on for a couple of seconds at a time to orient himself,
then turning it off again.  Flick: he looks at the left side of the
dish housing.  Flick: the right side.  He turns over onto his back and
slides partway in under the dish.  Flick: he grunts and grabs the
screwdriver.  Flick: once for the screws on each side of the cover
plate.  Flick: this time the light stays on.  He puts the flashlight
in his mouth, picks up the cylindrical widget---and a door slams.
Jeff freezes for a moment, then says, "Uh oh," indistinctly and
switches off the flashlight.

Cut to: a heavy-set man with a bristly mustache walking from the
chalet's back door to the yellow jeep.  He is muttering to himself in
Hebrew.  When he reaches the jeep, he unlocks the driver's door
(fumbling a bit, clearly under the influence), then scrabbles around
underneath the driver's seat.  After a moment he gives up and turns
around.  "Misha!" he bellows.  "Misha!"

Cut to: an outside shot of the front room of the chalet.  Several men
are smoking and drinking; a couple of heavily made-up women are
lounging around looking bored.  One of the men (balding, wearing
fashionable retro-60s horn-rimmed glasses) gets up, opens the window,
and yells something interrogative in Hebrew.

Cut to: the man standing at the jeep.  He yells in Hebrew; the
subtitle reads, "I can't find it.  It's not under the seat." The other
man's voice yells back (subtitle: "It's not under the seat, asshole,
it's in the glove compartment.") The heavy-set man pouts and mimes,
"It's in the glove compartment," then leans across the driver's seat.
A moment later he pulls himself out with a couple of CDs in his hand.

Cut to: a medium shot of the heavy-set man closing the jeep door and
walking back to the chalet, with Jeff lying under the satellite dish
in the foreground.  Jeff continues to lie there motionless until
suddenly Abba's Waterloo comes thundering out of the chalet stereo.
Jeff says, "Christ," in a disgusted tone, then switches on the
flashlight again.  He wires the bug into the satellite electronics in
just a few seconds, then closes up the panel, rolls over, and slithers
backward until he can stand up.  He puts the night vision headset back
on, then walks (not scurries) back to the edge of the cliff.  He looks
down at the ski lodge for a moment, then spits into the empty air.

Cut to: McFaddyen in the hotel room wearing a bulky military-looking
headset.  A side table has been pulled over near the sliding glass
door; the door is open wide enough to allow a cable to snake out to a
small antenna.  A tape recorder is running on the table; LED meters
rise and fall.  Krzezinski and Jeff come in.  When Jeff takes off his
jacket, we see that he still has his climbing gear on.  McFaddyen
raises his hand, not in greeting but to hush them.

KRZEZINSKI (impatiently after a moment's wait): "Well? You got
something?"

MCFADDYEN (suddenly smiling): "Yup.  Oh, yup." He looks up at
Krzezinski and sings in a mock-falsetto, "Waterloo..."

Cut to: Jeff and Krzezinski in the parking lot of a small airport.
Jeff is carrying several heavy bags; we can see some cables and bits
of electronics poking out of some of them.  Krzezinski has one
shoulder bag, and his keys.  Krzezinski opens the side door to a
hangar.

JEFF (stumbling under the weight of the bags into the hangar past
Krzezinski): "It'd go faster with two pairs of hands, you know."

KRZEZINSKI (sympathetic): "Yeah, I know, but Mac's got business to
take care of."

Cut to: McFaddyen sealing a FedEx envelope, handing it to a clerk,
then accepting his change.

Cut to: Jeff wrestling the last of the bags into the back of a small
plane as Krzezinski closes the hood and wipes his hands on a rag.

KRZEZINSKI: "You about done?"

JEFF (looking a bit aggrieved): "Yeah, they're all in there."

KRZEZINSKI (claps an arm around him): "Well then, let's get you home.
No sense just sitting around, eh?"

Cut to: a black-and-white shot of three hard-looking middle-aged men
listening to the tape.  Tastefully-decorated paper cups of designer
coffee are going cold in front of them.  They look angry and unhappy.
One of them is chewing on the end of a pen.  The voice on the tape
makes a joke; as the recorded voices laugh, one of the middle-aged men
listening to it colors and barks an order in Hebrew.

Cut to: a long shot of the small plane taking off.  The sun is just
coming up; the sky is cloudless and beautifully colored.

Cut to: a long black-and-white shot of a silver-gray BMW coming up an
otherwise-empty street.  It slows as it reaches a bus station, then
turns in.

Cut to: the cabin of the small plane.  Jeff is looking out his window
as the mountains go by underneath.  We see a couple of snowmobiles
dodging through sparse trees.

JEFF (blurting it out, as if it's been bothering him for a while):
"Hey, you know I left a lot of tracks up there 'n' shit.  They're
gonna know."

KRZEZINSKI (self-satisfied): "Yup." Looks at Jeff with a
just-ate-the-canary expression.  "I'm counting on it."

Cut to: a black-and-white shot of the yellow jeep screeching to a halt
in a parking spot at a bus station.  There are a few dirty piles of
snow on the ground.  The balding Israeli with the horn-rimmed glasses
gets out.  He is carrying a heavy briefcase, and looks hurried, but
not frightened.  He closes the door, locks it, looks at the keys for a
second, then grins and sticks them back in the lock, leaving them to
dangle.  He turns around and dies as he is shot twice in the chest at
close range by the middle-aged man who was chewing on the pen.
Somebody screams.  The middle-aged man walks calmly back to the
silver-gray BMW, gets in the passenger side, and is driven away.

Cut to: Krzezinski in the pilot's seat.  He glances at his watch and
grins like a wolf.  "I'm counting on it," he says again.

Cut to: Jeff arriving at work in a slightly tired American car with
extreme sport stickers on the bumpers.  He is wearing the clothes he
had on in the plane, and his bag is on the seat beside him.  'Work' is
a one-story brick industrial park building.  It's a sunny day.  Jeff
sprints to the front door.

Cut to: the lobby.  Angelica is sitting at the reception desk.  She is
in her mid-twenties, doll-like face, blow-dried blonde hair, with deep
cleavage and a tiny waist under a black-and-pink flamenco jacket.  She
looks up from her newspaper as Jeff comes in; the headline is "Bobby
Shot JFK To Get Marilyn!"

ANGELICA (looking back down at her paper, bored): "You're late."

JEFF (slows momentarily, looking at her hungrily): "Um, yeah.  Is he
in yet?"

ANGELICA (flipping a page in her newspaper): "Yeah.  He's chewing
everybody out now." She looks at her watch.  "Ought to be another
coupla minutes."

JEFF: "Thanks." He hesitates again.  "That's, uh, a nice jacket."
When Angelica doesn't respond, he hesitates again, then sprints down
the corridor.  Angelica cocks her head, pondering a picture in the
newspaper, then puts it down, scoops her breasts in her hands,
squeezes them together, and looks down critically at her cleavage.

Cut to: a large open-plan area holding a dozen desks, each with a
computer on it.  Jeff is the only person there.  As he turns on his
monitor and logs in, a half-dozen other men in their early to late
twenties file in with Monday morning expressions on their face and
coffee in their hands.  One of them, Fats, has a little goatee beard
and a jello-fat body.  He gulps the last of his coffee as he sits down
in the chair next to Jeff's.

JEFF: "How bad was it?"

FATS: "Usual thing.  Coupla new guys---that one's not Fred, I don't
know the other one's name.  Gave 'em everything except the fucking
company song.  Oh shit, here he comes." Fats hurries to put on his
headset as Mr. Lee comes through the door.

MR. LEE (fire in his eyes, points at Jeff): "You! Ski bunny! My
office!" Jeff sighs and gets up.

Cut to: Mr. Lee's office.  There are pictures on the walls of him
shaking hands with minor TV celebrities.  He doesn't bother to sit
down.

MR. LEE (hands on hips, feet apart): "So, you have a good weekend?
Decide to sleep in?" Taps his chest with his fingers.  "You think I
sleep in?  I'm here at five o'clock this morning.  You know why? I'm a
businessman.  I'm a businessman, and you should be too."

JEFF (dutifully): "Yes, Mr. Lee." He's looking at the pictures on the
walls.

MR. LEE (not mollified): "Don't you 'Mister Lee' me! You got a good
job, you make good money, I keep telling you, you show some ambition,
you could make a lot better money.  But whaddaya you do? You go
skiing."

JEFF (pushes out his cheek with his tongue for a moment before saying,
with a very slight grin on his face): "Actually, I went climbing." He
straightens up slightly.  "Shall I get back to my desk now, and make a
contribution to the company's bottom line?"

MR. LEE (looking a bit disgusted by Jeff's continuing lack of
ambition): "Yes, yes, bottom line, always think about the bottom
line." Follows Jeff out into the reception area.  "You listening?
Always think about the bottom line!" He pauses for a moment, then lets
his eyes slip sideways and down Angelica's cleavage.  When she looks
up from her paper, his eyes snap up to meet hers and he smiles
insincerely.  "That's a really nice suit," he says.

Cut to: the open-plan area.  Jeff's colleagues are typing, mousing,
and talking, all the while drinking coffee.  Jeff slips into his
chair, then picks up a phone headset and slips it on.  Beside him,
Fats rolls his eyes and mimes masturbation.  He pulls his microphone
down from his mouth, whispers, "School teacher," and rolls his eyes.

JEFF (smiles briefly, not really paying attention, then mutters): "OK,
friends, we'll take caller number one...  now!" He presses a button on
the phone and says, "Good morning, Lee Microsystems, how may I help
you?"

MALE VOICE (through Jeff's headphones, strong New York accent): "Oh,
so you're finally there now? Listen, I got this computer here, two
weeks I've got it, and its broken already.  You hear me? It's broken."

JEFF (professional voice): "I'm very sorry to hear that, sir.  Did you
buy it directly from us, or through a distributor?"

MALE VOICE: "I got it mail order.  I still got the receipt, right
here."

JEFF (typing and mousing): "OK, that's good, sir.  Now, can you please
describe the nature of the problem?"

MALE VOICE: "Yeah, the coffee holder thing is broken."

JEFF (freezes for a moment, searching his own machine with his eyes,
then says cautiously): "The coffee holder, sir?"

MALE VOICE: "Yeah, the coffee holder thing on the front.  It won't go
in and out any more."

Jeff stares at his machine, then reaches out hesitantly and pushes the
CD-ROM eject button.  The CD holder slides out with a whir.  He pushes
the button again, and it slides back in.  The male voice on his
headphones says, "Hello? Hello? Am I on hold again?" as Jeff bows his
head and massages his forehead.

Cut to: the bullpen, later that same day.  Fats is talking to one of
the new guys, with most of the other guys looking on amused, as we cut
in.

FATS: "---sue the whole species!  Defamation, libel, slander, inciting
racial hatred, the whole works! I mean, when the mothership lands,
man, what you want to be is a lawyer." Switches to a nasal
synthesizer-sounding voice: "We don't have Elvis.  We never touched
those cows.  We want one billion kooglats in damages, plus a year's
supply of asphalt." Glances sideways, continues in the same voice:
"Don't tell my wives about the asphalt, OK?" Some of the geeks
chuckle, some shake their heads, Fats clearly enjoys being the center
of attention.  He turns back to his machine and grins at Jeff.  "What
about you, earthling?" he says in the same voice.  "Would you like to
consume some primo grade A number one asphalt with us this evening"

JEFF (grinning back): "Uh, naw, thanks, but I'm going down to the
gym."

FATS (the smile slipping a bit): "Hey, haven't you heard?  Fit is out,
man.  Flares, bad dance music, and flab" (pats his belly) "That's what
babes are gonna be lookin' for in the next millenium."

JEFF opens his mouth to answer, but just then the light on his phone
starts to blink orange.  Fats turns back to his desk as Jeff puts his
headset back on, taps a button, and says, "Lee Microsystems, how may I
help you?"

ANGELICA (bored): "Hi, Jeff, there's a call for you." [click]

JEFF (after a moment): "Hello?"

JOEY: "Oh, hi.  This is Joey Rosetti.  You left a message for me?"

JEFF (turning away from the other guys, lowering his voice slightly):
"Oh yeah, hi, this is Jeff Rudiger.  Uh, we were skiing together on
the weekend? Well, not really skiing, you know, but..."

JOEY (brief pause): "Oh.  Oh, hi, how are you?"

JEFF: "Oh, I've had worse Mondays.  Not recently---I mean, being
squeezed through the birth canal was a while ago, but...  How 'bout
you?"

JOEY (not nearly as warm as Jeff): "Oh, the usual.  Not as much fun as
skiing, better than going hungry."

JEFF: "Yeah, the, uh, the secretary said, um, I didn't know you were
an accountant."

JOEY: "Mm hmm." Jeff has one hand slightly raised, and makes a
scooping come-here motion with it until she says, "So, your message
said you wanted me to call you."

JEFF: "Yeah, yeah, I just---well, I was wondering if you had an
evening free, maybe Thursday?  There's this Peruvian restaurant
downtown, they do chicken in sweet cheese and this green kind of Inca
cola stuff, it's pretty good."

JOEY: "Uh, Thursday? Um..." we hear the clickety-clack of laptop keys
through the phone. "No, I'm sorry, I've got papers to file Friday
morning, I'm going to be working late on Thursday."

JEFF: "Well, what about Friday? We could, uh, celebrate your papers
being filed, maybe get the chickens to sing the Peruvian national
anthem for you or something."

JOEY: "What, they serve their chickens raw?"

JEFF: "No, no, it's, um, look, they get enough of that Inca cola in
them, they don't care if they've been deep fried, they'll still get up
and sing."

JOEY (with a slight snort): "Well, how about you give me a call later
in the week, OK?"

JEFF: "Sure, sure, um, Wednesday maybe.  Uh, good luck with your
papers."

JOEY: "Thanks.  Good luck with your birth canal." [click]

Cut to: Jeff in his apartment, flipping through the channels while
munching on carrot sticks dipped in salsa.  As he eats, he
periodically wipes his nose (which is dripping from the spice in the
salsa) with a kleenex.  The phone bleeps; Jeff fishes underneath the
couch and picks it up.

JEFF: "Hi.  This is Jeff Rudiger.  I'm actually here right now, so if
you wait for the beep, we can have a conversation." [beat] "Beeeeeep."

KRZEZINSKI: "Hey, sport.  Beep you, too."

JEFF (smiling, mutes the TV): "Hey, John, how's it going?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Fine, fine, it's goin' fine.  How you feeling?"

JEFF: "OK.  Um, pretty boring day in the office, compared to the
weekend."

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, I know what you mean.  Same shit, different day,
right?"

JEFF: "Yeah, something like that."

KRZEZINSKI: "So, you got any plans for next weekend?"

JEFF: "Uh, like this weekend coming up, or the one after that?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, next weekend, uh, not this one, the next."

JEFF: "That's the, uh, what, the twenty-second?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Sure, whatever."

JEFF: "Nope, no plans.  Why, what's up?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Well, more of the same, actually." Pauses a moment.  "I
need a driver for a couple of days down east.  You interested?"

JEFF (fishes under his upper lip with his tongue, swallows, takes a
deep breath, looks at the TV---*Charlie's Angels* is just starting):
"Uh, yeah, yeah, I think so."

Cut to: Krzezinski and McFaddyen sitting in an airport bar.  Each has
a single non-descript carry-on bag.

MCFADDYEN: "I still think it's a stupid idea.  Why don'tcha just get a
fuckin' dog?"

KRZEZINSKI (humoring him): "Naw, dogs can't drive." He straightens up
and smiles a car-salesman smile.  "Hey---how are ya?" We see Jeff
approaching, also carrying a single non-descript bag, with a real grin
on his face.

Cut to: a small two-engine passenger plane taxiing to a stop at a
small airport.  The sky is overcast.  A woman in jeans and a bomber
jacket waits for the propellers to stop turning, then pushes a short
ladder cart forward.  The cabin door opens; an elderly couple come out
first, followed by McFaddyen, Krzezinski, and Jeff.

Cut to: Jeff signing the papers at the car-rental desk, smiling and
thanking the woman behind the desk (the same woman who helped with the
landing).  He turns, whistling a tune softly, tosses the keys up and
catches them.  Looking over his shoulder, we see Krzezinski and
McFaddyen waiting for him by the exit.  Two other men are with them.
Both have the same hard "maybe I'm a cop, and maybe I'm not" look
about them as McFaddyen.  As Jeff reaches them, the four stop talking
and look at him; Krzezinski's look is friendly, McFaddyen's neutral,
and the other two frankly appraising.

JEFF (hesitating for a moment): "Uh, King Cab, just like you said."
Dangles the key.  "But it'll only take three of us."

KRZEZINSKI: "'Sokay, Bill and Nick drove up.  Bill, this is Jeff;
Jeff, Bill, Nick." Everyone shakes hands with as hard a grip as they
can manage.  There's another momentary pause, broken by Krzezinski
saying (slightly impatient with the staring): "OK, girls, come on,
let's go to work."

Cut to: a glorious sunny shot of a rocky, forested coastline.  We hear
the yacht a moment before it cuts in front of the camera, very close.
The camera turns to follow it; we see the yacht's name painted on its
stern: *Thanks, Grandma*.

Cut to: a shot looking backward from the bow of the boat.  A young
Gatsby-esque couple in brightly-colored (very expensive) outdoor gear
and designer sunglasses are standing together at the helm.  They look
gorgeous as the camera tightens on them, until suddenly she sneezes
and pulls her jacket tighter around her.

GATSBYETTE: "Fuck, I'm freezing."

GATSBY (clearly enjoying the weather): "Aw, c'mon, it's not that cold.
Why don't you go get some coffee or something? We're almost there."
She nods and climbs down the four-step ladder to the main deck.  She
has to dodge around a Latino in a workman's jacket and heavy boots to
get into the cabin.  He pauses on deck, and shivers like the
Gatsbyette did.  Another Latino joins him, looking over his shoulder
at Gatsbyette as he comes out of the cabin.  In Spanish, he says, "I
still say you're full of shit."  The second one says, also in Spanish,
"Hey, come on, man, I know silicone when I feel it---she's got butt
implants, I swear."

Cut to: a deserted harbor.  There is a single long jetty, and three or
four boat sheds, all in disrepair.  A beat-up station wagon is parked
at the landward edge of the jetty.  Three men in fishing gear are
leaning against the station wagon.  All three are wearing bright
yellow slickers and pants, heavy fisherman's gloves, and rubber boots.
One is older, maybe in his forties or fifties; the other two are in
their early twenties, and clearly brothers.  The two younger ones are
smoking; the older one is looking out to sea through binoculars.

OLDER FISHERMAN (lowering the binoculars): "That'll kill ya, ya know."

BROTHER #1: "Yeah, I know.  So will boredom." Takes another puff.
"Any sign of 'em?"

OLDER FISHERMAN: "Yup.  Just come past Perry's Point, be about ten
minutes."

Cut to: Jeff and Krzezinski in the cab of the pickup truck.  They are
in the trees.  Krzezinski's window is down; he's looking through it
using a pair of binoculars.

JEFF: "Any sign of 'em?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah.  They just came around that bit of land.  They
ought to be here in about ten minutes." He picks up a walkie talkie
and thumbs the switch.  "You ready?" he asks.

MCFADDYEN's voice (with static): "Yeah."

KRZEZINSKI: "Do it." He puts the walkie talkie down, picks up a
short-barreled shotgun, opens his door, then pauses.  "You'll be all
right here?" he asks.

JEFF (shrugs): "Sure.  Die of boredom, maybe."

Krzezinski grins, then bails out of the cab, leaving the door open.
We see him from Jeff's POV inside the cab, running quickly, quietly
through the woods.

Cut to: the station wagon.  We hear branches cracking off-screen under
running feet.  The three fishermen spin around, startled.  "Freeze!"
shouts a voice from off-camera.  The brothers put their hands up; the
older one has already ducked down behind the car and opened the
driver-side door.  He slides in, starts the car while still lying
prone, and punches the accelerator with his fist.

Cut to: Krzezinski covering the brothers with the shotgun, shouting,
"Go! Go!" as McFaddyen springs back into the woods.  Krzezinski steps
back, still pointing his gun at the brothers, then spins and fires at
the station wagon, one shot, then another, from a crouch.  The glass
in the rear window shatters and falls away.  Krzezinski fires again,
missing.

Cut to: Jeff in the King Cab, watching through binoculars.  He brings
them down to look with his naked eyes, brings them back up, then drops
them, saying, "Shit! Shit!" as he shuffles his bum into the driver's
seat and brings the engine roaring into life.

Cut to: the station wagon.  The older fisherman has scrunched up to
get his feet onto the pedals.  He pulls the door shut as the station
wagon bounces over the pot-holed dirt road.  He looks up into the rear
view mirror, terror on his face, then peeks over the dash to steer.

Cut to: his POV as the King Cab roars out of the trees onto the road.
There's a crash! as the station wagon plows into its side; the camera
rocks forward and back in a whiplash motion.  We hear the truck door
open and slam shut, then boots stamp! stamp! stamp! on the hood of the
station wagon.  We see Jeff's legs on the hood of the station wagon,
then his hands holding a gun pointed into the station wagon.

JEFF (off-camera): "Just don't, OK? Not anything." In the rear-view
mirror, we see McFaddyen's jeep grind to a halt behind the station
wagon.  McFaddyen gets out, his machine pistol held ready, then
relaxes.

Cut to: the jetty, as *Thanks, Grandma* pulls up alongside.
Krzezinski, McFaddyen, and Bill are there in the fishermen's clothes,
taking ropes from the two Latinos and tying them off.

GATSBY (leaning over the rail, the smile on his face shutting off like
a light): "Hi.  Haven't seen you before...?"

MCFADDYEN: "Haven't seen you either." Looks up at Gatsby, squinting in
the sunlight.  "Prob'ly say the same thing tomorrow, if anyone asked."

GATSBY (relaxing slightly, nodding): "Yeah.  Carlos! Give 'em a hand."

Cut to: a shot from inside one of the derelict sheds.  Nick and Jeff
are standing over the fishermen with guns.  The fishermen have been
stripped down to their long underwear.  Nick is watching them while
cradling a walkie talkie on his shoulder.  Jeff keeps glancing through
the window.  We see Krzezinski, Bill, McFaddyen, and the Latino
carrying taped-up cardboard boxes to the boat.  The boxes are clearly
heavy.

Cut to: McFaddyen half-handing, half-pushing the last box up to the
other Latino as Carlos climbs back into the yacht.  Krzezinski and
Bill untie the ropes.  Gatsby opens his mouth to say something when
there's a squawk from Krzezinski's slicker pocket.  He pulls out a
walkie talkie.  "Yeah?" he says into it.

We can't hear the reply, but Krzezinski's face goes almost comically
horrified.  "Yeah! Yeah!" he blurts.  He pushes it back into his
pocket and shouts, "Beat it, the cops! "

Gatsby starts to say, "What?" but McFaddyen, Krzezinski, and Bill are
already running.  Gatsby gapes for a moment, then shouts in Spanish.
The engines roar to life; the yacht swings away from the jetty, its
mooring ropes trailing in the water like untied shoelaces.

Cut to: long shot of the yacht pulling away from the jetty, the three
mock-fishermen clambering into the station wagon.  Its engine roars;
it starts up the muddy road.

Cut to: Nick in the derelict boathouse, grinning.  He tucks the walkie
talkie into a pocket in his jacket, then says, "Watch 'em," to Jeff.
He steps over to look out the window, sets his machine pistol down on
the worktable beside him, and picks up a small remote control with a
long antenna.  As McFaddyen opens the door, Nick presses a red button
on the remote.

Cut to: the yacht, as an explosion blows out one side.  Carlos and the
Gatsbyette are thrown clear into the water.  As the yacht rolls onto
its side, we see Gatsby, still standing at the helm.

Cut to: Nick, putting the remote back in his pocket, picking up his
machine pistol and gesturing at the three half-naked men squatting on
the floor of the shed.  "Come on," he says.  Jeff is staring out the
window, horrified.  "You too," says Nick, nudging Jeff with the wrist
of the hand that's holding his gun.  "Come on!"

Cut to: the jetty.  Bill is standing there, watching the water.

Cut to: Carlos' head emerging from the waves amid the wreckage.  He
takes one stroke, then another, then suddenly there's a shot, and he
goes limp.

Cut to: outside the shed.  Krzezinski and McFaddyen are stripping off
the fishermen's clothes.  Bill joins them, holstering his pistol.  The
fishermen watch them, miserable, shivering.  The three mercenaries
quickly pull their own clothes back on.

KRZEZINSKI (to the fishermen, as his head pops through the neck hole
of a sweater): "Well, come on, you'll freeze out here!"

The fishermen hesitate for a moment, then move reluctantly to pick up
their clothes.  The older one stares hard at Krzezinski.

OLDER FISHERMAN: "So that's that, is it?"

KRZEZINSKI (shrugs): "Just business.  'Course, now you gotta figure
out how to tell Grandma that she's down eighty kilos of refined
sugar."

OLDER FISHERMAN (picks up his slicker, looks out to sea, ignoring his
own shivers): "That guy might've made it." Looks at Krzezinski.  "You
could've fished him out."

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, could've.  Didn't.  Now get dressed." To McFaddyen:
"See you guys back at the airport?" McFaddyen nods.  Krzezinski claps
Jeff on the shoulders, steering him up the road to the waiting King
Cab.  "C'mon, it's Miller time."

Cut to: the cab of the pickup.  Jeff is driving, looking straight
ahead.  They sit in silence for a few seconds.  Krzezinski finally
says, "What that old guy said bothered you, didn't it?"

JEFF (shrugs, as if it isn't important, then): "Yeah.  Yeah, it did.
You could've just, I dunno...  He would have froze before he got to
the pier."

KRZEZINSKI (shakes his head, back in older-brother mode): "Nope.  He
probably would've froze.  You don't last long in this business if you
put your trust in probably." He looks at Jeff for a moment, then back
at the road (which is unpaved, and steeply uphill).  "This isn't a
judge-and-jury job," he says.  "Fuck, put 'em in court, they'll just
buy the judge, then hire some blow-job specialist for a lawyer, and
boof! They're back in Massachusetts selling shit to schoolkids.  We
did what we had to, no more, and if you can't accept that, well, you
just say so, and we'll go our separate ways."

After a moment, Jeff nods.

KRZEZINSKI: "Good." He nods emphatically.  "Good.  You kept your head,
did your bit.  You did good." He claps Jeff on the shoulder, then
twists around to look out the back window of the truck.

Pull back for a long shot of the truck heading up the road.  Past it,
down the hill, we can see the docks.  McFaddyen and the others are
throwing the body of the older fisherman into the water.  The two
younger men's bodies are already floating there.

Fade to: JEFF asleep in bed.  Weak sunlight is coming in through the
window, and the radio is playing.  He wakes up slowly, blinking and
working his mouth absent-mindedly as if he'd swallowed something
unpleasant.  When he's finally fully awake, he lies in bed for a few
moments, staring at the wall, clearly lost in thought.

Cut to: Jeff standing in the bathroom, clipping his nose hair in time
with a thrash version of the *Muppet Show* theme, wearing nothing but
bright blue briefs.  He stops to admire himself, starts to say, "You
are one handsome---" and sneezes all over the mirror.  He looks at the
mess for a second, then snorts wryly.

Cut to: JEFF on the highway.  The early morning colors are almost
blindingly bright.  He has the window down, and his arm is hanging
out, alternately banging on the door in time with the radio or making
an airfoil with his hand.  He comes up to a red light and stops; while
he's waiting we see that the guy in the car beside him is resting his
elbow on the power window, which he is sending up and down an inch or
two at a time.

Cut to: an interior shot of the car rolling into the parking lot at
work.  The lot is full; he glances down at the dashboard clock (it's
about quarter after ten) and mutters, "Joke 'em if they can't take a
fuck," as he backs the car into a slot.

Cut to: JEFF sidling through the front door into the reception area,
pretending to hide behind a potted plant, skulking along the wall,
then relaxing, a bit disappointed, when he sees that Angelica is not
at the front desk.  He starts to walk normally to the bullpen when he
hears Angelica saying, "No! Stop it!" in a frightened tone.  He takes
two quick steps to Mr. Lee's office door, which is slightly ajar, and
slowly pushes it.

Cut to: the camera swinging as if it were mounted on the door to
reveal Angelica and Mr. Lee in the classic stand-off position, one on
each side of his desk.  Angelica is holding Mr. Lee's computer
keyboard in both hands like a baseball bat.

ANGELICA (angry and frightened): "I swear, I'll take your fucking head
off if you try that again, you...  you...  harasser!"

MR. LEE (mock-serious, clearly made horny by the exercise): "Me?
Harass? I just asked you if you wanted a date!"

ANGELICA: "Asking me if I'll let you to pour cream on my boobs so that
you can watch a box of kittens lick it off isn't, isn't---that's not a
date, Mister Lee! That's not a date!"

MR. LEE: "Sounds like a pretty good date to me." The humor drains
from his face.  "I'll even pay for dinner, OK? That's gotta be better
than telling the police about the money you stole from me.  You think
they care about harassment more than that?"

ANGELICA (still hefting the keyboard): "What money? What are you
talking about?"

MR. LEE (cold, hands on the table): "A guy come to fix the
photocopier, he charge one hundred twenty two dollars, you write down
one hundred seventy two.  I ask you get me a new chair, you got me a
real nice chair, eight hundred dollars, but you tell me nine hundred.
You buy paper for the printer, you pay for two hundred boxes, we get
only one hundred twenty.  Where the rest?" He points at her
accusingly.  "You steal from me, you owe me.  You got an allergy for
kittens or something? OK, fine, we can play other games, but you owe
me."

ANGELICA's face has fallen during Mr. Lee's speech.  She lowers the
keyboard slowly, staring at him.  After a moment of silence, she says,
"You fucking bastard."

MR. LEE (grinning like a wolf, knowing he's won): "You fucking
right."

Cut to: Jeff dropping into his chair in the bullpen.  Everybody else
is already on calls.  Fats pulls his headset back.  "Wild weekend?" he
asks.

JEFF shakes his head and shrugs.  "Watched some guys go swimming.  How
about you?"

FATS shrugs in return.  "Double-header Saturday: *Apocalypse Now* and
*The Wall*.  Not the uppest night of my life." He tears a piece off
the top of his bran muffin and chews it while he speaks.  "First call
this morning, the guy's asking where the 'any' key is.  I say, the
'any' key? And he says, 'Yeah, the manual says, press any key.'"

JEFF gives him a look.  "That's so old."

FATS (swallowing muffin): "Mmph! Hey, the guy really called! Maybe
he's still looking for someone who knows where it is." He glances back
at the bullpen door.  "Our little emperor give you shit for showing up
late?"

JEFF hesitates, then shakes his head.  "Naw.  He was talking to
Angelica about supplies and stuff.  I snuck past."

FATS rolls his eyes, swallows his mouthful of muffin.  "Hey, Pavel and
I were talking, and he said that maybe she lactates.  You know some
women do that, just naturally? And I was wondering---"

JEFF (tired and angry): "Fuck off, Waller! Just, just leave it, OK?"

FATS: "Hey, hey, don't be skipping your meds on me or anything." He
turns back to his work, muttering, "I was just wondering..."

JEFF puts on his headset and reaches for the call box, but never makes
it.  Instead, he pulls out his wallet and takes out a business card.
After looking at the card for a moment, he puts it back in his wallet
and pulls over a pad of paper.  He writes a ten-digit phone number on
the pad, then, underneath it, writes "555 1212", and subtracts the two
numbers.  He looks at the result for a second, then taps it into the
call box.  As he listens to the phone ringing on the other end, he
tears off the sheet of paper, folds it, folds it again, then tears it
into tiny pieces and drops them into the garbage.

A FEMALE VOICE: "Hello?"

JEFF clears his throat.  "Um, hello, hi there.  Um, I was hoping to
speak to John.  Is he around?"

FEMALE VOICE (to someone else): "Hey, is your name John?" To Jeff:
"Yeah, he's here.  Hang on." There is a moment's silence; Krzezinski's
voice says, "Hello?"  In the background we can hear a rhythmic sound.

JEFF (spinning around in his chair to put his back to the rest of the
bullpen): "Hi, John, it's Jeff.  Am I getting you up?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Uh, nope, actually, I am up."  (in a raised voice, not
speaking into the phone) "Hey honey, can you stop doing aerobics for a
second?  I'm on the phone."  (normal voice) "What can I do for you?"

JEFF: "Uh, well, I was wondering---do you know any guys in, uh, in the
business who'd be interested in making a quick house call?  Nothing,
uh, nothing serious, uh, just to talk to a guy, you know?"

KRZEZINSKI (voice suddenly sharp): "You in trouble? Fuck, where are
you? Are you in Vegas?"

JEFF: "No, no, no, I'm at work.  I just---" He leans forward and drops
his voice.  "My boss is hassling this woman here at work, right, and I
was just thinking that maybe you'd know somebody who could, who could,
um, well, make him see the light, so to speak."

KRZEZINSKI: "You want somebody to come out and slap your boss around a
bit, is that it? Fuck.  Who's this woman?"

JEFF (with a look on his face that makes it clear that he wishes he'd
never made the call): "Uh, just the secretary.  We're not, she's not
my, um, it's not what you think." He covers the microphone with one
hand and mouths, "Shit shit shit!" Taking away his hand, he continues,
"Hey, listen, it's nothing, OK? I'll sort it out.  Uh, you get back
to, um, to whatever."

KRZEZINSKI: "Hang on, hang on.  I didn't say I couldn't help you, I
just wanted to know how big a burger you wanted for your bun.  Tell
you what: gimme your address, I'll call a guy I know, maybe he knows
someone.  But you gotta do something for me, OK? I need a driver next
weekend, same deal as last time.  You up for it?"

JEFF (slumps, realizing he's in deep water): "Uh, uh..." He shakes his
head.  "Sure.  Sure, John, that'd be great.  I'm at 102397 Lane
Avenue---yeah, Lane Avenue, I know, it's a dumb name.  How about I
meet the guy in the parking lot? In an hour?  OK, thanks."

Cut to: the parking lot at noon.  Jeff is standing by his car,
fidgeting, checking his watch, looking around.  A motorcycle pulls
into the lot.  As its rider dismounts, Jeff hurries over.

JEFF (to the motorcycle rider): "Hi! I'm Jeff; you must be..."

MOTORCYCLE RIDER (pulling off helmet to reveal a shaven-headed
teenager with a nose ring): "In a hurry.  Here." He thrusts a
clipboard at Jeff.  "Ya gotta sign for it." He rummages in his
shoulder bag and pulls out a padded envelope while Jeff stares at the
clipboard in confusion.  The motorcycle rider looks at him for a
moment, then says impatiently, "You understand 'sign for'? As in, to
write one's name, to make an inscription proclaiming one's
individuality, but which in fact contributes further to our collective
subjugation to an increasingly depersonalized system? Fuck, here, hold
this." He thrusts the envelope into Jeff's hands and takes the
clipboard.  "Elllviiss...  Presssleyy..." he mutters, scribbling on
the form.  "Here ya go!" He tears a sheet off the form, hands it to
Jeff, puts his helmet back on, and roars away.

Cut to: JEFF, from behind, watching the motorcycle accelerate.
Suddenly a figure in a suit steps between the camera and Jeff.  Jeff
turns around and nearly has a heart attack.

JEFF: "Shit!  Oh, sorry, you startled me." He stops; the shock leaves
his face.  "And you are...?"

Cut to: medium shot of the two of them together.  The newcomer says,
"Elvis.  Elvis Presley." He is in his thirties, black, with one dead
eye.  He and Jeff shake hands.

JEFF: "I, uh, I didn't see you---"

ELVIS: "I parked a couple of lots up.  What's the hose?"

JEFF (relaxing, a smile spreading on his face): "Uh, well, it's pretty
simple, actually..."

Cut to: Elvis and Jeff coming through the door into reception, Jeff
first, holding the door for Elvis.  Angelica looks up from her
magazine, does a double take.  She opens her mouth to say something,
but Jeff heads her off.

JEFF (brightly): "Mister Lee in his office?"

ANGELICA: "Yeah, but---"

JEFF (without stopping): "Great.  It's, uh, just through there," he
says to Elvis, pointing.  Elvis nods at Angelica, says, "Ma'am,"
politely, steps past her desk.  Angelica starts to get up to stop him,
but Jeff has stepped to the edge of the desk. He puts his hand on her
shoulder gently to stop her.

ANGELICA: "Hey, he---I mean, Mister Lee is---"

JEFF: "Mister Lee is a fucking bastard, right?" He holds her, looking
straight at her face.  She glances at him, looks past him at the door
as Elvis closes the door behind himself, looks at Jeff again,
realizing that something is up but not knowing what it is.  Jeff lets
go of her.  She opens her mouth a couple of times as if to say
something, then slowly sits back down in her chair.

The camera stays on them both.  We hear a shout from inside Mr. Lee's
office, then a crash, then "Hyeeeah!" and "thump! thump!"  Angelica
starts to get up, but stops and sits down when Jeff reaches out to put
his hand on her shoulder again.  She keeps staring at Jeff.

The door opens a few moments later.  Elvis comes out rubbing his jaw.
He glances at Jeff.  "Should've told me he was Korean," he says.
"Fucking wicked kick." He puts out his hand.  "You'll get my bill in
the mail."

JEFF (shaking hands): "Uh, yeah, sure, whatever."

ELVIS (gently): "That was a joke." He nods at Angelica, says, "Ma'am,"
again, and walks out.

They both watch him go, then Angelica turns to Jeff.  "Why did he call
me ma'am? I don't look that old, do I?"

Before Jeff can answer, we hear another crash from inside the office,
and then someone fumbling with the door handle.  Jeff quickly ducks
around the corner.  Mr. Lee appears in his office door.  He leans
against the frame, breathing heavily, cradling one arm, blood from his
nose all over his face and shirt.  Angelica squeaks as Lee looks at
her with raw hatred.

MR. LEE: "Fucking bitch." He says something in Korean, clearly rude,
then switches back to English.  "OK, you get six months severance, you
get fucking out of here right now.  You come back here, I buy a gun, I
shoot you.  You don't fuck with me." He staggers back into his office.

ANGELICA (blinks): "Six months? Six months?" She looks at Jeff in awe,
then spins around in her chair, presses a button on the phone, and
says, "Hello, this is Lee Enterprises.  Mister Lee is currently
licking a dog's ass.  If you leave a message after the tone, he'll
come and lick yours when he's done."  She spins around again to say
something to Jeff, but he's gone.

Cut to: JEFF in the bullpen, talking into his microphone: "No, sir,
when it says 'Press any key', that doesn't mean there's actually a key
labeled 'any'.  You can press any other key on the keyboard, and it
will---no, sir, not the shift key, that doesn't do anything on
its---yes, sir, I know, I said 'any other key', but I meant---sir?
Sir? Shit." Jeff pulls off his headset and massages the bridge of his
nose for a moment.  He stares at his screen, then pulls out his wallet
and takes out a scrap of paper.  With a surreptitious glance around,
he taps the number into his phone's keypad.

The phone rings in his ear once, then a cool professional voice says,
"Good afternoon, Dick, Wang, and Snorkers, may I help you?"

JEFF: "Um, yes, Miss Rosetti please."

VOICE: "May I tell her who's calling, please?"

JEFF: "Yes, it's Jeff Rudiger."

VOICE: "One moment, please." An orchestral version of Blondie's
*Hangin' on the Telephone* plays briefly, then the voice comes back.
"I'm sorry, Ms.  Rosetti says she's in a meeting at the moment, may I
take a message?"

JEFF: "No, thanks, there's...  No, no message."

VOICE: "Thank you."

JEFF: "Thanks." He pushes a button on his phone and turns around in
his chair---coming face to face with Angelica's impressive bosom.  He
hesitates a moment before looking up and saying, a bit weakly, "Uh,
hi."

Angelica has her coat and purse in her arms.  "Hi back.  I just wanted
to thank you for helping to sort things out this morning." The bullpen
has gone quiet; Fats and a couple of others are trying to slip off one
earphone so that they can hear without being obvious that they're
doing it.

JEFF: "Uh, sure, I, I, uh, anytime."

ANGELICA waits a moment for him to say something more, then, trying to
keep the conversation going, gestures toward the telephone: "You get
the brush-off?"

JEFF (glances at telephone, unable to remember for a second what he
was just doing): "Uh, uh, yeah, kind of."

ANGELICA (smiling seductively): "Well, whoever she is, her bad luck's
good for me." She glances around, clearly aware that they're being
watched, then looks at Jeff again, eyes glittering.  "I mean, if
you're not doing anything this evening, I'd really like to thank you
properly for being such a big help."

FATS gasps softly, then looks back at his screen, embarrassed.  Jeff
suddenly wakes up to what's happening and grins up at Angelica.
"Sure, ma'am," he says in a drawl.  "Anythin' fer a lady..."

ANGELICA: "Well okay then." She shifts her purse to her shoulder.
"I'll be out in the parking lot." Her hips swing from side to side as
she leaves.  Every face in the room turns to watch her go; once she's
gone, they all turn in unison to look at Jeff with a mixture of envy,
disbelief, and incomprehension.  One of the Orientals elbows the guy
beside him (another Oriental), and says something quick in Korean.
The subtitle reads, "With the skinny guy??" The other grunts,
frowning.  The first one looks at his screen blankly for a moment,
then his face screws up and his lower lip starts to tremble as he
fights back tears.

JEFF turns back to his computer, looks at it for a moment, then
reaches out slowly with one finger and turns off the monitor.  He
whistles a couple of notes, then cracks his knuckles and gets up to
go.  As he walks past Fats' chair, he claps him on the shoulder.  Fats
grunts.

Cut to: Jeff and Angelica doing a full-body press just inside the door
of her apartment.  It's immaculate, but all the colors are a bit too
bright.  Her jacket and purse are on the floor, he's trying to get his
shoes off without taking his hands off her, until finally she pulls
away and says, breathlessly, "Wait, wait, I've got to get my diaphragm
in." She gulps some air.  "Whyncha go into the bedroom? I'll be there
in just a sec."

Jeff nods, trying to control his breathing.  He watches Angelica
scamper away, then pulls off his shoes and walks, a bit drunkenly,
into the apartment.

Cut to: Jeff entering Angelica's bedroom.  He bellyflops onto her bed,
then rolls over and looks at the ceiling for a moment.  Bored with
that, he props himself up on his elbows and looks around.  He notices
a picture on her dresser, reaches over, and picks it up just as
Angelica comes into the bedroom wearing a short housecoat tied at the
waist, open enough to show her bra.

JEFF: "Whozzis?" He waves the picture at her.

ANGELICA (taking the picture away from him gently but firmly and
putting it back on the dresser): "That's my daughter Oprah."

JEFF: "You named your daughter after Oprah Winfrey?"

ANGELICA (happily): "Yeah.  She's a very strong role model." She
sighs, then pushes Jeff back and crawls on top of him.  In between
kisses and love bites, she says, "I hoped it'd make up for me being so
weak..."

Cut to: Jeff coming into work early the next morning.  Fats is the
only other person there.  Fats watches as Jeff logs in and starts up
his timesheet.  He waits until Jeff has picked up the headset before
speaking.

FATS (nonchalant): "So, uh, um, so how'd things go last night?"

JEFF (fitting the headset before turning to speak with him): "She owns
an anatomically correct teddy bear.  How about you?"

FATS (still nonchalant): "Oh, the usual.  A coupla classic Trek
episodes, some really bad Laotian takeout, a bit of one-handed Web
surfing..." (the last accompanied by a small hand gesture).

JEFF (not really paying attention): "Uh huh.  Trek's good."

FATS looks at Jeff for a moment, then pushes his chair back from his
desk.  "Hey, Jeff---what the fuck are you doing here? I don't mean,
what are you doing here right now, at quarter past six in the morning
when you could still be doin' the horizontal cha-cha with Miss
Wisconsin, I mean, what are you doing here with all us geeks? You
don't belong with us."

JEFF (bleary): "It's just a job.  Everybody's gotta have a job,
right?"

FATS shakes his head.  "No, no, you're not listening to me.  Here."
He reaches over beside his computer, picks up a small Tupperware
container, offers it to Jeff.  "Go ahead, take some."

JEFF looks inside the container, then sniffs it gingerly.  "Coffee
grounds?" he asks.

FATS nods.  "Uh huh.  Fresh out of the pot this morning.  Here, lemme
show you." He takes back the container, then scoops out a fingerful
and stuffs it into his cheek.  "Like chewing tobacco," he explains.
"It's a real buzz."

JEFF sighs.  "You're weird, you know that?"

FATS shakes his head.  "Uh uh," he says.  "Not here I'm not.  'Round
here, you're the weird one." He leans over and spits the grounds into
the garbage can (it makes a cash-register sound), then looks coldly at
Jeff.  "And I gotta tell you, the sooner you realize that and get the
fuck out of here, the happier we'll all be."

Cut to: a truckstop in northern Maine.  One half is a diner with
peeling linoleum, the other half the sort of bar that has one pool
table and doesn't serve imported beer.  The sign up over the diner
says, "Sam and Ella".  A green Ford four-door swings off the road and
parks.  Jeff and Krzezinski get out and go into the diner.  A moment
later, Jeff comes back out and turns off the car's headlights.

Cut to: the interior of the diner.  Three men sitting together in one
of the booths look up sullenly, suspiciously, as the camera
approaches.  The oldest, balding with his hair pulled back in a pony
tail, is in a plaid jacket.  The second is wearing a fleece-lined jean
jacket, while the third, who has wire-rimmed glasses on, is in black
leather.

Cut to: an upward shot from the back of the table, taking in the three
men, Krzezinski, and Jeff (behind him).  Krzezinski has his salesman's
smile on.  "Hi," he says.  "You must be Anthony."

The older man snorts.  The guy in glasses sniffs.  "Yeah," he says,
"I'm Tony.  Who's your friend?"

Krzezinski looks over his shoulder at Jeff, waits.  "Uh, Jeff," says
Jeff, a little slow to pick up the cue.

Tony scratches the side of his neck, no expression on his face.
Finally he nods.  "Sure," he says.  "Have a seat." The older man
bum-shuffles to make room for Krzezinski and Jeff.  Krzezinski waves
Jeff in first, keeping the aisle seat for himself.

The silence stretches---ten seconds, thirty, a minute, while a metal
version of *Amazing Grace* plays in the background.  Just as Tony
opens his mouth to speak, the waitress shows up.

"Hi, guys, what can I get for you?" She's about forty, wearing jeans
and a "Cruise the Thousand Islands" sweatshirt, and bored.

"Coffee, please," says Krzezinski, with an emphasis on the "please",
leaving Tony hanging with his mouth open.  "And do you do home fries
with gravy?"

WAITRESS: "Yeah, 'course."

KRZEZINSKI: "OK, well, we'll skip those.  How about grilled chicken, a
big pile of cole slaw, and a baked potato?"

WAITRESS: "Why, ya wanna skip them too?"

KRZEZINSKI (smiling): "Nope, I'll eat those."

WAITRESS: "OK, chicken 'n' slaw for the wise guy, baked potato.  How
do you want your potato?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Uh, well done."

WAITRESS: "No, I mean, do you want sour cream, do you want some
cheddar melted on it, just salt and butter...?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Salt and butter, thanks."

WAITRESS (to Jeff): "How 'bout you?"

TONY (cutting in): "Burger.  With fries."

BALDING GUY: "Burger and fries."

THIRD THUG: "Burger and fries."

The waitress doodles on her pad, looks at Jeff---everybody looks at
Jeff.  "Uh," he says, looking at the three thugs, sideways at
Krzezinski, back at the menu: "Uh, burger, please.  And cole slaw."

WAITRESS: "Sure." She picks up the menus; as she goes off camera, we
hear her saying, "Sam! Three double grease, one grease with slaw, one
dead bird with slaw and a spud."

KRZEZINSKI: "Local girl?"

TONY: "Naw.  She's from Payette."

KRZEZINSKI: "Where's that?"

TONY: "'Bout three miles down the road."

KRZEZINSKI: "Ah." Another silence; Krzezinski's smile is getting a bit
thin.  "So, McFaddyen told you what the scoop is?"

TONY: "Yup.  Didn't tell me you'd have anyone with you, though."

KRZEZINSKI (shrugs): "He's just here to count the bodies.  Now how
about we stop snarling at each other and do some business, OK?"

TONY shrugs.  KRZEZINSKI smiles again.  "OK then.  Tell me about this
place."

TONY looks at the balding guy.  "'Bout five, six guys out there most
nights," the balding guy says.  "Used to be an office for the logging
company, they put a coupla windows back in it, got the stove working
again."

KRZEZINSKI: "Real homemakers, huh?" Pulls a piece of paper out of his
jacket pocket, unfolds it, takes out a pen, starts ticking things off
on the list.  "Any dogs? Trip wires? Infrared? Microphones?  Seismic
sensors? Satellite downlook? Pheromone sniffers? Psychics?"  The bald
guy's mouth is hanging open at the end of this while Tony is looking
at Krzezinski with a bit more respect.  "No? OK, then, we go in, we
blow the place, we make very sure that everything burns, and then we
come back here and get a beer.  Fucking pushover, right?"

Cut to: Jeff and Krzezinski getting in the car later.  Jeff starts the
car, then says, "She was kind of cute."

KRZEZINSKI: "What? Who?"

JEFF: "The waitress." Colors a bit when Krzezinski looks at him, says
defensively, "I mean, she'd be OK for a weekend."

KRZEZINSKI (snorts): "Not a long weekend."

JEFF (putting the car in gear): "That crack about counting the bodies
was just to impress them, right?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, 'course." Snorts.  "Not that they're hard to
impress."

JEFF (nods): "And this place we're blowing up...?"

KRZEZINSKI (deep breath, sighs): "Indians.  It's reservation land now.
They're working for the Chinese."

JEFF (disbelieving): "Fuck, come on, give me a break.  The Chinese?"

KRZEZINSKI (shrugs): "Russians can't afford to pay 'em any more, they
work for the Chinese.  Hey, I don't make this shit up, you know?  They
got a grudge against the white man, they want a bankroll, why not the
Chinese? Weren't no Chinese at Wounded Knee.  Come on, let's get
going." Jeff backs the car out, puts it on the highway.

Cut to: A shaky hand-held shot of Jeff running through the underbrush
back to the car.  The camera catches up with him just as he reaches
the passenger-side door.  A beefy hand spins him around.  Another big
hand, belonging to the same heavily-built Indian who has been chasing
Jeff, punches Jeff hard in the face.  Jeff goes down onto the wet
ground, blood streaming from his nose.  The Indian kicks Jeff hard in
the side, then brings his foot up and stomps on his back.

INDIAN (breathless, kicking Jeff again and again): "Fuck off.  Fucking
ghost.  Fuck off." The Indian stops to catch his breath.  Looking
around, he sees a fallen tree branch.  He goes over to pick it up.

Jeff gets to his hands and knees, then, by bracing himself against the
car, to his feet.  He clutches at his stomach.  The Indian turns
around, hefting the branch like a baseball bat.  Jeff pulls out a gun
and points it at the Indian shakily.

JEFF (swaying on his feet): "Uh uh.  You fuck off."

INDIAN (disbelieving): "What?"

JEFF (slightly stronger): "I said, fuck off, or I'll shoot you."

The Indian stares at him a moment longer, then swings the branch back
and charges with a howl.  Jeff waits until the last moment to fire.
The Indian's momentum carries him into Jeff with a thud.  The branch
flies over the car roof, and the Indian collapses.

Cut to: Krzezinski bursts out of the bushes with a machine gun in one
hand and an automatic in the other.  It's the same shaky traveling
shot as the one of Jeff a moment earlier, but instead of the car on
its own, we see Jeff trying to push the Indian's body into the back
seat of the car.

KRZEZINSKI (slightly winded:) "Fuck that, get in the car and drive."
He drops the machine gun onto the roof of the car, pops the clip in
the automatic, puts in a fresh one, and picks up the machine gun
again.  Jeff is still trying to get the Indian into the back seat.

KRZEZINSKI (scans the forest alertly for a second, then focuses on
Jeff and the Indian, and says angrily): "Hey! Get in the fucking car!"

JEFF (still wrestling with the Indian's body): "He's hurt." Jeff
pauses for a moment, clearly exhausted.  "I shot him.  We have to get
him to a hospital or something."

Krzezinski puts the automatic on the root of the car, squats, and
presses two fingers against the Indian's throat for a moment.  "No we
don't," he says.  He takes Jeff's arm and pulls him to his feet.  The
Indian's body slumps sideways, like a drunk's.  "C'mon!  We've got to
get out of here."

Krzezinski tosses the machine gun onto the back seat of the car.  Jeff
is staring at the Indian's body.  Krzezinski opens the front passenger
door of the car and pushes Jeff into it.  As Jeff automatically
reaches for his seatbelt, Krzezinski slams both doors shut and runs
around to the driver side.  The engine starts.  The car surges forward
onto the road, lights out.  As it does so, the automatic that
Krzezinski left on the roof slides off and lands in the mud a few feet
from the dead Indian.

Cut to: the car, a few moments later.  Jeff is mopping at the blood on
his face with the tail of his t-shirt.  Krzezinski is focused intently
on driving: both hands are clutching the wheel, and his back is very
straight.

JEFF (wearily): "We shouldn't have left him."

KRZEZINSKI (all hard edges now): "You've been watching too many
fucking movies.  We always leave 'em.  What do you want, everybody
gets dead and no-one gets to go home? Fuck." Krzezinski pounds the
wheel with both hands, enraged.  "Fuck fuck fuck! I knew I shoulda
stayed clear of those fucking puppy-shit fuckups"

JEFF (starting to realize that he ought to be scared): "I don't want
to do this any more.  All right? I don't...  want...  to do this any
more."

KRZEZINSKI (only partly paying attention): "Yeah, well, I don't want
to do any more like this either.  Fucking puppies.  Why the fuck did
Tony start shooting, do you know?" He glares at Jeff.  "Huh? Do you
know?" Jeff says nothing.  Suddenly Krzezinski is 100% back in the
car.  He looks at Jeff more calmly.  "How's your face?"

JEFF (staring down at his bloody t-shirt): "I think my nose is broken.
Fuck, John, I killed that guy."

KRZEZINSKI: "Yup.  Yup, you did." The car bounces over a pothole.
Krzezinski spins the wheel, and the car is finally back on a paved
road.  It hums as it picks up speed.  "Pretty sloppy job, too.  You
gut-shoot a guy, all you're doing is giving him a chance to gut-shoot
you.  You should've aimed higher, or put a second round into him."

JEFF (nasal voice full of self-loathing): "Yeah, like a real tough
guy."

KRZEZINSKI (straight): "Yeah.  Like a real tough guy." He looks
sidelong at Jeff again.  "You want out?"

JEFF: "What a fucking question.  Yes, John, I want out.  I want right
fucking out."

Tires screech on pavement as Krzezinski hits the brakes.  Jeff twists
around instinctively to get his back to the door, not knowing what's
going to happen, clearly afraid that Krzezinski is going to kill him.
Instead, Krzezinski sits still at the wheel for a moment, then says
quietly, "Yeah, well, just remember you killed a guy back there, all
right? You can spend the rest of your life growing fucking potatoes or
something, but you killed a guy back there, and you better keep shtumm
about it, or they'll plug your chair in right next to mine.  You got
that?"

Jeff nods.

Cut to: the car, from behind, gaining speed down the highway.

Cut to: a belly shot of a passenger jet landing at sunset.  The music
is a slow reggae rendition of the *Hawaii Five-Oh* theme.

Cut to: Jeff and Krzezinski entering the airport concourse in a swirl
of other passengers.  In the background we see a long-haired grunger
sitting on top of his duffel bag, playing a reggae version of the
*Hawaii Five-Oh* theme to pass the time.  Jeff slows and turns to say
something to Krzezinski, but Krzezinski just keeps moving,
expressionless, leaving Jeff standing as the camera pulls back to show
the other passengers stepping around him.

Cut to: Jeff sitting in a yuppie bar, complete with old bicycles and
30s-era Coke ad posters on the walls.  His nose is taped up, and his
eyes are starting to show bruises.  He has a half-empty glass of beer
in front of him, and is moodily drawing a happy face in the frost on
its side.  A couple in their forties are sitting at a table a few feet
away; as the sound fades in, we hear the man speaking intensely.

INTENSE MAN (suit jacket off, tie undone, but shirt still crisp and
clean): "...up to Seattle or something, I don't care.  I just want one
more weekend.  I just, I just don't want it to end like last night."

WOMAN (sad, and clearly wishing she was elsewhere): "You're not
listening.  For once would you please just listen? It's over.  Christ,
I should never have come here." She starts to gather up her purse and
jacket.  "Louis is a---he's a good father, he's, he's---I can't
believe he's been as good about this as he has been.  He doesn't
deserve to---I can't, OK? It's just not going to happen."

INTENSE MAN (leaning forward, face hard): "So you're saying he'd be
pretty pissed if someone told him that we had one last fuck tonight,
is that what you're saying?"

WOMAN (after a pause, voice cold): "I get it.  Let's not, and you'll
say we did, is that it? He wouldn't believe you."

INTENSE MAN (puts his elbows on the table, playing his trump): "He
would if he got a copy of that tape you made of us in your room when
we were down in San Francisco.  What do you think he'd think of you
talking about how much you like the taste of a fresh, firm zucchini?
Huh?"

WOMAN (horror, disgust, and disbelief fighting for face-time): "He'd
think you were a miserable piece of shit, that's what he'd think.
That's what I think.  I'm leaving."

INTENSE MAN: "And what about the pictures?"

WOMAN (pulling on her jacket, giving her hair a couple of strokes with
the palm of her hand to flatten it): "What pictures?"

The INTENSE MAN starts humming *The Stripper*.  As he does so, he
reaches up and sloooowwwllly undoes the top button on his shirt, never
taking his eyes from the woman's face.

WOMAN (without conviction): "You didn't take any pictures.  You're
just---" She stops suddenly as Jeff reaches down to grab the intense
man's tie and pull it up hard.

JEFF (conversationally): "You know what I really hate? Even more than
retro dance music? It's shits like you making people's lives
miserable.  Now how about we---" He gets no further as a pair of big
hands grab Jeff from behind, pull him away, and push him into the bar.
The camera pulls back to show the bar's bouncer (the pale, muscular
woman from the opening scenes).

BOUNCER (face and voice hard): "Now how about we pay up and find
ourselves a cab? Or would we rather discuss this with some really cute
guys in uniform?" Before Jeff can answer she turns to the couple.
"I'm very sorry about this, sir, ma'am.  Are you both all right?"

INTENSE MAN (doing up his shirt button): "Yeah, I'm fine.  This, this
nut just grabbed me, that's all.  Sondra? Are you OK, honey?"

WOMAN: "Yeah, I'm OK." She pats her hair with her hand again
distractedly.  "I just want to go home."

The intense man stands and waits for her to get up.  He starts to
follow her out, then stops and says to the bouncer (loudly enough for
Jeff to hear), "Guess I should've checked the special.  I didn't
realize you could get abuse around here so cheap," then goes.

JEFF (after a brief pause): "Well, fuck, that was a pretty weak line."
He sits down on the bar stool.  "What the fuck ever happened to, I'll
be back, or, But in the morning, I'll be sober."

BOUNCER: "Don't know, don't care.  Get your stuff, get going."

JEFF: "But hey, he was---"

BOUNCER (a little louder): "Don't know, don't care.  And whatever he
was, it's between him and her, it's nothing to do with you or me.  Now
get your stuff, and get out."

JEFF (feeling hard done by): "Fuck, look, I just---"

BOUNCER (cutting him off): "Shawna! Shawna, get Pete and Marty down
here, and call the cops."

JEFF (hands raised): "OK, OK, I'm going, I'm going." Picks up his
travel bag, drains the last of his beer as Pete and Marty (two of the
waiters) arrive.  "I was only trying to help." The bar staff trio
watch him leave, arms crossed, expressions identical.

Cut to: another bar, another beer.  Jeff is drawing a frowny face in
the frost on this one.  The clientele are mostly Hungarian or some
other brand of mid-European immigrant, mostly in their fifties or
sixties.  A few are in sharply-tailored suits, the men wearing large
gold pinky rings and the women wearing too much makeup; the rest are
small-time shop owners or carpenters.  The music is provided by a very
good, very bald, violinist; it is slow and sad without being
schmaltzy.  After a moment, Jeff pushes his beer aside.

JEFF (to the bartender): "Hey---can I use your phone for a second?"

BARTENDER (a woman in her fifties, with over-permed hair but a nice
face and a Hungarian accent): "Sure, but for a local call?"

JEFF (spreading his hands): "Hey, who do I know who isn't local?
Thanks." He puts the phone down on the bar, pulls out his wallet,
pulls a scrap of paper from the wallet, and dials.

We hear the phone ring once, twice, then a click and a woman's voice.
"Hello?"

JEFF: "Joey Rosetti, please."

JOEY: "This is Joey."

JEFF (swallows a sip of beer): "You know, it's kind of embarrassing,
but I just can't get you out of my mind.  I know you're probably
getting tired of me leaving messages, but I swear, it's not that I'm
desperate, or some kind of weirdo, it's just that I keep wondering who
you really are."

JOEY: "Who is this?"

JEFF: "I mean, you know how people are always asking kids, 'What do
you want to be when you grow up?' I think it's 'cos most of us are
still looking for a good answer.  I always wanted to be a fire truck.
People'd say, 'You mean a fireman,' and I'd say, 'No, a firetruck,
'cos they're big and red and they get to make lots of noise and they
can go wherever they want and everyone's always glad to see them.' I
dunno about you, but I'm not having as much fun as a firetruck these
days." Listens to the phone for a moment.  "And, you know, I figured
maybe you weren't either, and maybe..." Listens to the phone for
another moment, then sighs.  "Never mind.  I'm sorry for disturbing
you."

JOEY: "Wait!" There's a moment's pause.  "Are you at Bartoly's?"

JEFF: "What?"

JOEY: "Are you at Bartoly's? The bar?"

JEFF: "Um..." Covers the mouthpiece of the phone, hisses, "Hey, is
this Bartoly's?" Uncovers the mouthpiece.  "Yeah.  How'd you know?"

JOEY: "Well, duh, I've got caller identify.  My dad used to drink
there."

JEFF: "Really? I thought Rosetti was Italian or something."

JOEY: "That's my first dad.  My second dad's name was Budanyi."

A pause, and then Jeff says, "So, am I interrupting anything?"

JOEY: "Naw, just work.  Some guy claims the aliens speak to him when
he's in the shower, want him to sue a whole bunch of people for libel.
They don't have Elvis, they've never touched Dana, the Cubs aren't
their fault, the cows aren't their fault, on and on and on.  He wants
me to figure out what the U.S.  Government is worth so he can file the
claim."

JEFF: "Pfff...  does he pay cash? I mean, a guy like that, I'd be
afraid he was going to want to pay in dilithium or something."

JOEY (gently): "I was joking.  I was really just watching some old
episodes of *Cheers*."

JEFF: "And eating popcorn?"

JOEY (we can hear the smile): "No, no popcorn."

JEFF (takes a deep breath): "I could make popcorn." He closes his
eyes, counting seconds silently.  At three, just as Joey starts to
speak, he says, "No, wait a second, that's wrong.  I mean, I mean,
yes, I can make popcorn, but I shouldn't have said that."

JOEY (after a pause): "What about ice cream?"

JEFF: "I don't know how to make ice cream.  My mom used to, I think,
but I never learned how."

JOEY (scornfully): "No, what about just picking some up and bringing
it over?  Anything but chocolate."

JEFF: "I thought women loved chocolate."

JOEY: "Yeah, you and every other guy who ever read Cosmo.
Butterscotch swirl is good, or mango or orange or something like
that."

JEFF (starting to grin): "How about I get a couple of tubs, and you
decide which you like best?"

Cut to: Jeff getting out of his car with a shopping bag weighed down
with several cartons of ice cream in one hand, and a bunch of
cellophane-wrapped flowers in the other.  Joey's house is small,
modern, and anonymous.  Jeff puts the ice cream down on the stoop,
holds the flowers up in front of his face, and rings the bell.  The
wait stretches beyond a few seconds, then Joey opens the door.

JEFF: "Hi." He hands her the flowers and bends to pick up the ice
cream.

JOEY: "Hi.  Oh, thank you, they're---ohmigod, what happened to your
face?"  She steps out of the way as Jeff enters, closes the door
behind him.

JEFF: "I cut myself shaving.  No, wait." He puts up a hand as Joey
opens her mouth.  "Sorry, that was stupid.  I didn't do this to
myself, if that's what you're wondering.  A guy hit me, that's all."
Shrugs.  "I think I had it coming to me."

JOEY: "Yeah, probably.  Most guys do." Blinks.  "Um, here, the
kitchen's right through here, let me get these in water.  They smell
beautiful."

Cut to: Jeff sitting at Joey's dinner table as Joey sets a bowl full
of five different colors of ice cream down in front of him.  The
flowers are in the background in a vase on the counter between the
kitchen and the dining area.  Joey sits down in front of a bowl like
Jeff's, looks at it, then looks up at him.  "I can't believe they make
hummus ice cream."

JEFF shrugs.  "They had wheat, too."

JOEY (takes a slow scoop of ice cream, studies it for a moment, turns
the spoon over so the ice cream is upside-down, puts it in her mouth,
pulls the spoon out slowly, works her mouth, smacks her lips.  "Mmm...
Wheat?"

JEFF: "Yeah, like bread ice cream or something."

JOEY: "Hmm." Swallows another mouthful of ice cream, then says,
somewhat apologetically, "I don't think the hummus works."

JEFF (overlapping with the tail of her sentence): "No, the hummus
doesn't work." They look at each other for a moment, grinning.

Cut to: the couch in Joey's living room, some time later.  They are
curled up together, Joey's head tucked into the hollow of Jeff's
shoulder.  Her eyes are closed.  He is stroking her hair slowly.  The
world is silent.  After a moment, she blinks her eyes open and pulls
her head back to look at him.  He kisses the end of her nose.  She
smiles, then yawns.

JOEY: "'S late."

JEFF: "Mmm." Rolls his shoulders to stretch without taking his arms
off her.  "You mind if I crash here? I mean, here on the couch?"

JOEY (putting her head back on his shoulder): "Doesn't have to be the
couch."

JEFF (smiles, nods, kisses the top of her head): "Thanks, but..."
Closes his eyes, yawns.  "'F we go to bed, we're not going to get any
sleep, and I'm way, way tired."

JOEY pulls her head back to look at him, unblinking.  "You're kind of
strange, you know that?"

JEFF nods, tired.  "Yeah, I know.  What time you get up in the
morning?"

JOEY: "Seven.  Out of here by eight, usually.  What about you?"

JEFF: "Whenever." Yawns.  "Got an appointment on campus at two, talk
to a guy about doing some courses."

JOEY: "Oh yeah? You get time off from work for that?"

JEFF: "Got all the time I want." Yawns again.  "You got plans for
tomorrow night?"

JOEY nods.  "Yeah, going out with the choir." Pause.  "But I'm not
doing anything Wednesday."

Cut to: a small back yard, early on a Saturday morning.  The grass is
wet from overnight rain, but the sun is shining so brightly that the
audience can almost smell the fresh air.  Jeff is sitting in a lawn
chair on the deck, reading the morning paper, with a mug of coffee
beside him.  The bandage is off his nose.  He has a small goatee beard
that must have taken two or three weeks to grow.  He sets the paper in
his lap and reaches down carefully to get his coffee.  As he lifts it,
a few sheets of the paper slide out onto the wet lawn.

JEFF: "Shit."

JOEY (opening the sliding glass door as he says it and coming out with
her own coffee): "What? Oh, now look what you've done." She hands him
her coffee, but as he takes it, even more of the paper slides onto the
lawn.  She gives him a mock-disgusted look, then says, "Hey!" as he
samples her coffee.

JEFF: "Mmm...  Black." Makes a face, working his tongue around his
mouth as if to wash away the taste, then hands the mug back to her.

JOEY ignores it for a moment, bending over to pick up the paper
instead.  "You didn't say how your meeting went," she says, not
looking at him.

JEFF: "I didn't get there in time.  Traffic was backed up past
Eldridge."

JOEY pauses for a second, then continues to pick up the paper.
"Enrolment closes next week, doesn't it?"

JEFF: "I know.  I'll do it Monday, I promise."

JOEY (just a little exasperated): "You don't have to promise.  If you
really don't want to go back to school, then don't."  She straightens
up and reaches for the coffee.  The doorbell rings faintly in the
distance.  "Oh, shit, it's probably Martin.  Here." She hands Jeff the
paper and goes back into the house.

JEFF says: "Who's Martin?" but she's already gone.  The paper slides
back onto the grass.

Cut to: Jeff a moment later, putting the last of the soggy paper onto
the pile on his chair, then picking up his coffee and taking a sip.
He winces---it's Joey's.  As he's swapping mugs, Joey comes back
through the glass door, Krzezinski behind her.  Jeff freezes when he
sees Krzezinski, then looks at Joey, then back at Krzezinski.

JOEY (in a neutral voice): "And here he is."

KRZEZINSKI (warmly): "Thanks, Miss Rosetti.  Hi, kid, how are you?"

JEFF: "Uh, fine.  Just fine."

JOEY (after an awkward pause): "Well, can I get you some coffee,
Mister...?"

KRZEZINSKI: "John.  John Krzezinski.  I'm sorry, I didn't introduce
myself at the door.  Yes, please, coffee would be great.  Um, just
black is fine, thanks."

Joey turns to go into the house.  Jeff suddenly wakes up and says,
"Uh, here, lemme help you." He hands the two mugs of coffee he's
holding to Krzezinski and follows Joey through the sliding glass door.
The camera stays with Krzezinski for a second as he turns his head to
read the headlines on the wet newspaper.

Cut to: Joey's kitchen.  Joey is clearly angry, but has it under
control---she doesn't bang things, she doesn't raise her voice.  "I
didn't know you'd given people my address," she says.

JEFF: "I didn't."

JOEY (turning to face him, eyes blazing): "Then how did he know where
you were?"

JEFF (quietly): "'Cos that's what he does.  That's what I do." He
looks straight into Joey's eyes for a moment, then over at the coffee
pot.  Slowly, picking his words carefully, he says, "I'm as surprised
to see him as you are.  There's gotta be something big going on."

They stand there a moment, not looking at each other, then Joey says,
"Hey.  This thing that you do, is it legal?"

JEFF (pauses, shakes his head): "Nope.  But it isn't criminal either,
if that's what you're really asking." Looks straight at her again.
"There's just some things the government can't do, not without
tripping all over its own feet or getting snarled up in paperwork.
That's where he comes in.  I just help him out sometimes." Sighs, then
opens a cupboard and takes out a mug.  "You're welcome to come sit
with us.  He's actually a pretty cool guy."

JOEY: "He's the one from skiing, isn't he? The one with the knife?"

JEFF nods, hands her the mug.  She looks in it, picks up a dish towel,
gives it a wipe, then sets it down beside the coffee pot and crosses
her arms.  "No thanks," she says after a second.  "I'll let you two
talk about what you've got to talk about." She shakes her head.
"You're all such fucking boys, aren't you?"

Cut to: Jeff coming back outside, handing Krzezinski his coffee,
taking his own in return.  Jeff takes the newspaper from the seat of
the other chair, drops it on the grass, and sits.

JEFF (after sipping his coffee): "So how did you find me?"

KRZEZINSKI (nonchalant): "Went through your wallet while you were
passed out on the plane coming home, found her number.  Used to be
hard to work backward, but now there's these CD-ROM things, they've
got all the phone numbers for the whole country on 'em.  Mac got me
one for Christmas, takes about ten seconds to find someone."

JEFF (neutrally): "Would rather have done this at home."

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, well, been there a couple of times too, but you're
not around there much any more.  Heard you quit your job, too.  Got
anything in the works?"

JEFF shrugs.  "Couple of things.  Maybe get back into programming,
maybe start doing some serious climbing again."

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, well, until that pans out, I've got a weekend job
up in Seattle, and I was---"

JEFF: "John---John, I told you, I'm not playing this game any more.
It isn't as much fun as I thought it would be, you know?"

KRZEZINSKI (pauses, nods slowly): "Yeah, I know.  I know exactly what
you mean.  And I want to apologize for being a bit rough on you in the
car that time.  Things didn't go well, I was a bit wound up, you
know?"

JEFF snorts.  "Didn't go well...yeah.  That's one way of putting it."

KRZEZINSKI: "Well how else do you want me to put it? You never seen a
guy lose his grip, do a one-way off a hill? That's what makes it real,
kid.  Fuck, you might as well be on a climbing wall with two guys
holding the reins on your diaper if that's what you want.  Things went
completely fucking sour, OK? And part of it's my fault for taking on
some half-wit help because things had to get done quickly.  You think
I don't think about that? But the job's gotta get done, and I'd
fucking rather have me and you doing it than some of the fucking bozos
that are out there." Gulps his coffee as if it were beer.  "Now, this
thing in Seattle? It's nothing like the last one, I swear.  Mac's
going to be running it, just you and him, no cowboys."

JEFF: "So why don't you get Elvis or someone? Why me?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Who the fuck is Elvis?"

JEFF (coloring slightly): "I mean, the black guy you sent around that
time."

KRZEZINSKI (after thinking for a moment): "Where did you get 'Elvis'
from? Is that what he told you his name was?"

JEFF: "No, he---look, it's a long story, OK? And it's really not
important.  Why not use him? Why me?"

KRZEZINSKI (takes a big breath, lets it out): "Because he only owed me
one favor, and I used that up getting you laid, remember? Look, it's
right in the middle of the city.  Nobody does anything really ugly
right in the city, nobody professional anyway.  Come on---you know you
want to."

JEFF: "Uh, no, actually, I know I don't." Waves his coffee mug to
include the house and backyard.  "I'm actually kind of enjoying my
vacation."

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, well what happens when the vacation's over? You
think Miss Rosetti's going to want to hang out with a ski bum, or some
guy who does help-line shit for some no-name computer company? Uh uh,
tiger, ain't gonna happen.  I bet she's got a pretty low threshold for
boredom, and I bet double you're back to watching Jackie Chan movies
with the guys on Friday night just as soon as she figures out that
you're just another premature has-been.  Now, do you want to hear me
out, or do you want to take your chances with Miss Rosetti?"

Cut to: Jeff sticking his head into the converted bedroom Joey uses
for an office.  "Knock knock," he says.

JOEY looks up from her paperwork, takes off her glasses, leans back in
her chair.  "Well?" she asks.

JEFF shrugs.  "I'm going to be on the road for a couple of days.  It's
no big deal."

JOEY picks up her glasses, puts them back on.  "Do me a favor, OK?
Don't tell me about it?" Jeff opens his mouth, but she cuts him off.
"Not even a little bit." She looks at him sadly.  "You want to go down
to the market, get some figs and cheese for lunch?"

Cut to: Jeff and McFaddyen sitting in the front of a nondescript
rental car, Jeff at the driver's wheel.  Both men are staring straight
ahead, expressionless.  McFaddyen slowly leans to one side.  Jeff
suddenly wrinkles his nose in disgust.

JEFF: "Fuck, would you cut it out?" He starts rolling down his window.
McFaddyen grabs his arm.

MCFADDYEN: "Here they come." Jeff starts the car.

Cut to: the concrete plaza outside the Seattle FBI office.  Four men
in sunglasses and dark suits are escorting a fifth man, older and
plumper, to a minivan.  Everything is quiet and efficient: two of the
FBI agents look around while the others help the man they're escorting
into the back of the minivan.  The two lookouts get into the car
parked behind the minivan, and the small convoy sets off.  A few
moments later, Jeff's gray rental car zooms by.

Cut to: the inside of the car.  McFaddyen is holding on to his
shoulder strap with his right hand.  Suddenly he says, "Take this
right."

JEFF: "But---"

MCFADDYEN: "Right!" Jeff signals and turns.  McFaddyen stays tense,
watching the rear-view mirror.  "And this one, right again."

JEFF (glances in the rear-view mirror): "You see someone?"

MCFADDYEN (muttering): "Not yet." The car turns smoothly.  He watches
the mirror a moment longer, then relaxes.  "OK, they still haven't got
trailers on."  He pulls a pen and a small notebook out of his jacket
and scribbles something down.  "You hungry?"

Cut to: a chain restaurant, Denny's or something similarly
down-market.  Jeff has a stack of pancakes in front of him; McFaddyen
has cereal and fruit.  They eat in silence for a moment, then Jeff
says, "What did you mean, 'still'?"

MCFADDYEN (swallowing): "What?"

JEFF: "You said, 'They *still* don't have trailers on.' How long have
you been watching them?"

MCFADDYEN: "Couple of weeks.  Me and two other guys.  You know how
it's done?" Jeff shakes his head.  McFaddyen takes another scoop of
cereal, speaks with his mouth full.  "First guy follows for three or
four blocks, no more than that.  Next day, second guy's waiting for
them at the same spot, first guy's further up ahead, different car.
Sometimes you guess right, sometimes you don't, either way you get at
least a few blocks each day.  Highways are great---they get on the
highway, you just follow them to find an exit, pick them up there the
next day."

JEFF: "So you already know where they're keeping him?"

MCFADDYEN: "Mmm hmm.  Redmond.  Full of spooks anyway, that place.
You know Gates is deep cover for the Agency?" He glances at Jeff, then
back down at his cereal.  "C'mon, think about it, you're supposed to
be smart.  You think that Windows crap would've beaten the Mac if he
didn't have some heavy on his side? Now he sits there watching
everything everybody does every day.  Best scam black ops ever came up
with."

JEFF (not sure whether he should take this seriously): "Uh huh.  I
always thought Windows had to be government work."

MCFADDYEN (still eating, ignoring Jeff's sarcasm): "And the Internet.
You think that was just a bunch of geeks that wanted to watch girls
doing tricks with Coke bottles, but were too cheap to buy the
magazines? Agency again.  Pretty soon they'll have everybody doing
business on the wire, they'll sit back and get fat and still keep a
trace on everything that happens."

JEFF: "I didn't realize you knew so much about computers."

MCFADDYEN: "Well, just goes to show, right? Can't judge an old dog by
its tricks." Finishes the last of his cereal, nods at Jeff's plate.
"Tidy that up, we've got some shopping to do."

Cut to: Jeff standing in front of a mini-mall hardware store with an
extendable ladder and a couple of brightly-colored plastic shopping
bags.  A maroon minivan pulls up, McFaddyen at the wheel.  We hear the
side door open, some clunking and banging, a muffled 'shit' as Jeff
bangs something, then the door closes and he gets in.  The minivan
pulls away to reveal one of the shopping bags still sitting on the
pavement.  A moment later, a kid on a skateboard swoops by and scoops
it up.

Cut to: Jeff and McFaddyen getting out of the minivan, which is now
parked at a motel.  Jeff is carrying the shopping bags; the ladder is
left in the minivan.

Cut to: McFaddyen in front of the motel room door.  He stoops to peer
at one of the hinges, then straightens up and unlocks the door.  Jeff
glances at the hinge curiously but doesn't say anything.

Cut to: the motel room as the door opens.  McFaddyen flicks on the
light, looks around for a moment, then enters; Jeff follows.  As he
sets down the bag, Jeff says, "I read a story once, some spy novel,
the guy always left a toothpick in the door when he was out so he
could tell if someone had opened the door while he was away."

MCFADDYEN: "Uh huh." Hangs up his jacket, loosens his tie, sits down
to start undoing his shoes.

JEFF (after a moment): "So is that what you were doing, or was the
hinge just squeaky, and you wanted to see if it needed some oil?"

MCFADDYEN (looks up from his shoes): "I use a bit of thread, not a
toothpick.  Where's the fruit?"

JEFF: "It's---hang on, it must be back in the van." Picks up the keys
and goes out.  McFaddyen takes off his other shoe, picks up the TV
remote, switches it on, then pulls a shaving kit out of his bag and
unzips it.

A few moments later, Jeff comes back in.  "It's not there.  I must
have left it in one of the stores, or when you picked me up."

MCFADDYEN sighs.  "So what you're telling me is, I'm stuck here all
afternoon watching daytime television without even any fucking figs to
eat? This fucking job..." He snips a Q-tip at an angle with the
scissors on his pocket knife, then tucks it into a straw and blows.
Phht! The Q-tip dart sticks into the wall opposite his bed.

Cut to: a house in a lower-middle-class suburb, about 6:00 that
evening.  The drapes are drawn.  The minivan is parked in the
driveway.  Jeff and McFaddyen get out.  Each is carrying a gym bag.

JEFF: "Do I lock it?"

MCFADDYEN says nothing, but points the key ring at his door like a
phaser.  The locks go *sloop*.  They walk to the front door of the
house, and McFaddyen rings the bell.

A BEER-BELLIED MAN in a plaid shirt and jeans opens it.  He starts to
say, "Yeah, whaddaya---" but McFaddyen pushes the door open and brings
up a gun that wasn't there a moment before, holding it right up in the
man's face, so that he has nowhere else to look, all the while
crowding the man so that he keeps moving backward into the house.
Jeff follows, closing the door behind him.

MCFADDYEN (conversationally, almost soothing, as he forces the man
back): "Right, this is a gun, and the bit you're lookin' at's where
the bullet comes out, right, so now that you know you don't have to do
anything stupid to find out, do you?" McFaddyen steers the man around
a divider and into the living room.  It holds an overstuffed chair, a
couch, a coffee table with a handful of videos on it, a small wall
unit with a stereo and some knick-knacks, and a large TV/VCR on a
stand.  As the man collapses onto the couch, Jeff kneels, pulls the
man's pantlegs up a couple of inches.

BEER-BELLIED MAN (startled, trying to pull his legs away): "Hey, get
your faggot hands off me!"

MCFADDYEN (suddenly hard, but no louder): "Shut up.  And you," (to
Jeff, as Jeff fishes a roll of duct tape out of his pocket and starts
winding it around the man's ankles), "This isn't a Boy Scout test.
She'll be home soon."

Jeff finishes taping the man's legs.  "Hands," he says.  The man
hesitates a moment, then sticks out his arms.  Jeff undoes the wrist
buttons of the man's plaid shirt, then rolls up the sleeves as neatly
as a nurse getting a patient ready for injection.  McFaddyen is still
pointing his gun at the man's head.  The only sound for the next few
seconds is the *skrrrrritch* of tape coming off the roll.  Jeff
finishes by gagging the man with one last piece of tape.

McFaddyen keeps the gun pointed at the man for just a second too long,
then thumbs the safety over and tucks it back under his jacket.  He
sits down on the coffee table.  Jeff stands a bit awkwardly to one
side, not quite sure what to do next.

MCFADDYEN: "Right, now here's what's going to happen.  Your wife's
going to come home, we're going to sit her down beside you, we're all
going to have a pleasant evening watching Vanna spin the wheel, and
then my friend here and I are going to do a little business, and then
we're going to go away.  Do you understand what I've said so far?"
After a slight pause, the man on the couch shakes his head.

MCFADDYEN: "What?"  The man on the couch tries to mumble something
through his gag.

JEFF leans over and tears the tape from the beer-bellied man's face.
"What did you say?"

BEER-BELLIED MAN: "I said, Vanna doesn't spin the wheel.  She turns
the letters."

JEFF looks at him for a moment, then says, "Smartass," and presses the
gag back into place.

Cut to: MCFADDYEN sighing softly, settling down on the couch beside
the beer-bellied man.  He picks up the TV remote and points it at the
TV.  The beer-bellied man tries to say, "No, don't," through his gag,
but McFaddyen has already pressed the play button.  The tape starts;
it's the middle of a bad 70s-era porn film, complete with jiggling
breasts (on the woman) and sideburns (on the men).

MCFADDYEN (stares at it for a moment, then grins widely): "Well, now,
I guess it's not going to be such a long night after all." He shifts
from the table to the couch.  He watches the TV for a moment (we can
hear dubbed "oohs" and "aahs"), then says, "Hey, I remember this one.
She's in the shower at the end with the priest and the rubber duck,
right?"

Cut to: a small ten-year-old American car is being parked behind the
minivan in the driveway.  A middle-aged woman gets out, wearing a blue
raincoat over a janitor's dress and sensible shoes.  She has a
shopping bag in one hand.  She starts to close the driver-side door,
then stops to push the lock down before slamming it shut.

The camera follows her around to the back of the house.  She is
muttering the whole way: "...no-good friends just parkin' where they
please...keep the house clean..." She unlocks the back door and steps
in.

Cut to: the interior of the house.  She is in the kitchen; she puts
the shopping bag down on the counter.  We can hear muffled "oohs" and
"aahs" coming from the living room.  "Jessup!" she says sharply.  "You
watchin' that filth again? Whyncha go out and look f' work 'stead of
sittin' 'round messin' up my couch?" She has taken off her raincoat as
she speaks.  When she turns, she is looking straight down the barrel
of Jeff's automatic.

JEFF (tense but calm): "No mess today, ma'am, not unless you decide to
scream." He reaches for her.  She pulls the raincoat to herself
protectively as if he were a common thief.  "Now, now, you just come
along into the living room," Jeff says, taking her arm firmly and
steering her around the corner as if they are dance partners.

Cut to: the living room.  McFaddyen is up, popping the video out of
the VCR, his gun still in his hand.  He glances up as Jeff and the
woman come in.

MCFADDYEN: "Evening, ma'am." He gestures with the gun at the couch.
"Have a seat, we're just starting the second show."

THE WOMAN (not moving, eyes blazing): "And who the hell are you?  What
the hell d'ya think you're doin' in my---" McFaddyen backhands her,
hard.  She staggers a step.  Jeff's eyes go wide.  He opens his mouth
to say something, but McFaddyen beats him to it.

MCFADDYEN (hard, his accent stronger): "This isn't a social call, so
I'm not going to say 'please' and 'thank you'.  Sit down, right now,
or I'll sit you down."  He nods with his chin at Jeff.  "Get her taped
up."

As the woman sits down, and Jeff kneels beside her to start taping her
ankles, McFaddyen picks up three of the videos on the table and flips
through them.  "Deeper Than You Think...  Co-Ed Climax...  What's this
one?" He holds up the third tape.  The beer-bellied man says, "Oh,
no," despairingly through his gag as McFaddyen pushes it in.  Just as
Jeff tapes a gag over the woman's mouth, the video starts.  It is an
amateur home shot of the pot-bellied man with a teenage girl.
Everyone watches stunned for a moment, then McFaddyen whoops and
starts laughing, Jeff rolls his eyes and mutters, "Oh, no," and the
woman starts trying to kick her husband's shins with her taped legs.

MCFADDYEN (to Jeff, without taking his eyes off the TV): "Go set up
the ladder.  This is too good to miss."

Cut to: Jeff in the kitchen, flipping a knife one-handed, somewhat
gingerly.  There's an empty beer bottle on the counter beside him.  We
can still hear 'oohs' and 'aahs' from the TV.  Suddenly they stop.
Jeff keeps flipping the knife.

MCFADDYEN (comes around the corner): "Come on, it's time." He watches
Jeff flip the knife another couple of times, then darts forward,
snatches it out of the air, pivots, and throws it *thunk* into the sad
clown print hanging over the dinner table.  He takes a roll of masking
tape from his pocket, says, "Gimme your arm," to Jeff, and starts
tearing off 1-inch pieces and putting them on Jeff's sleeve.

Cut to: the back yard of the house.  It is about two in the morning,
dark with overcast.  Jeff is standing at the bottom of the ladder,
looking up.

Cut to: McFaddyen, in the bedroom upstairs.  The window is open.  He
has just tied one end of the clothesline to the top rung of the
ladder.  He loops the free length around his back in a climber's
cinch, then leans out the window and gives a thumbs-up.

Cut to: Jeff standing under the ladder.  He pushes it away from the
house, leaning into the push until he feels the ladder start to tip
away.  The camera pulls back so that we can see McFaddyen paying out
the rope, keeping it taught so that the ladder doesn't tip right over.

Cut to: Jeff at the bottom of the ladder, which is now leaning
slightly away from the house.  He grabs the uprights with both hands
and starts walking the ladder forward, first one leg, then the other.
It's hard work, and awkward.

Cut to: a high shot of the ladder standing mostly upright in the
middle of the back yard.  It slowly starts to tilt toward the
neighboring house as McFaddyen pays out some rope.

Cut to: Jeff, looking worried, waving his hand 'more...  more...
slower...  stop!'

Cut to: the top of the ladder making a very quiet 'thump' as it comes
to rest against the neighboring house, a couple of feet below a
window.

Cut to: Jeff, one foot on the ladder, taking a gingerly step up with
the other.  He waits a moment to see if the ladder (which is tilted
forward more than it should be) will slip, then takes another step,
and another.

Cut to: Jeff's head and shoulders as he reaches the top of the ladder.
He starts to reach inside his jacket with one hand, pauses, and then
leans forward so that his forehead is against the side of the house.
Bracing himself that way, he uses both hands to pull a rolled-up piece
of paper out of his jacket.  Using the bits of tape from his sleeve,
he tapes the unrolled piece of paper to the window.  That done, he
climbs back down the ladder quickly and quietly.

Cut to: Jeff walking the ladder back to the house.  There's one
heart-stopping moment when one of its feet slips, but Jeff steadies it
after some brief acrobatics.  It takes only a few seconds to get its
feet back to where they started.

Cut to: McFaddyen pulling in the last of the rope.  He catches the top
of the ladder with his hand to prevent it from banging against the
house.

Cut to: Jeff coming through the kitchen door.  As he comes around the
corner into the living room he sees McFaddyen standing there with his
automatic in his hand, screwing on a silencer.  The beer-bellied man
and his wife are staring at McFaddyen, mesmerized.

JEFF (halting suddenly, the "we did it" grin disappearing from his
face): "Uh, now wait a second..."

MCFADDYEN (not looking up): "Shut up." He tightens the silencer with
one last twist, then steps over the coffee table to sit down just a
few feet from the captive couple.

MCFADDYEN: "Now...  nobody's been killed tonight, not yet." He taps
the beer-bellied man on the knee with the silencer.  "Not yet," he
repeats thoughtfully.  He looks at the woman.  "Be a shame if that had
to change." He pauses a moment.  When he speaks again, his voice is
harder, his accent thicker.  "You'll be thinking about going to the
police.  When you're thinking about it, keep in mind that this is
Seattle.  We couldn't have found our guy without some help, and if you
go carrying tales, that same help'll let us know." He reaches forward
suddenly, and, before the beer-bellied man can react, tears the tape
off his mouth.  "Have you got that?"

BEER-BELLIED MAN (nods jerkily, terrified): "Yeah, yeah, I got it."

McFaddyen reaches over to the woman.  She doesn't pull away as
McFaddyen takes the tape off her face.  "And you?"

WOMAN (looks straight at McFaddyen for a moment before saying, icily):
"Tell me, are you proud of what you do?"

MCFADDYEN stares at her, not believing what he's just heard, then
grins like a wolf.  "Hey," he says, spreading his hands and giving her
husband a meaningful look, "At least I've got a steady job."

Cut to: the minivan doors closing as Jeff and McFaddyen get in.  The
van starts quietly, the lights come on, and it backs out of the
driveway onto the street.  Slowly, almost sedately, it cruises away
into the night.

Cut to: Jeff coming into Joey's bedroom with two Starbucks cappuccinos
in his hands.  Joey is asleep.  Jeff sits down on the bed very
carefully, then dips his finger into one of the cappuccinos and puts
his finger in Joey's open mouth.  Her lips move slightly.  Jeff does
it again.  She sucks on his finger, then smiles and says sleepily,
without opening her eyes, "Missed you." Jeff sets the coffees down on
the dresser very carefully, then stretches out on the bed beside her,
on top of the sheets, and puts one arm around her.  Joey snuggles up
against him; after a moment, Jeff's grip tightens and he closes his
eyes.

Cut to: the kitchen.  Jeff is reading the paper while eating a bowl of
Cheerios.  When the microwave bleeps, Joey takes out the two cups of
coffee, sets one down in front of Jeff (who mumbles "Ank ew"), then
sits across from him.  After a moment, she quietly says, "Hey."

JEFF (glancing at her, then back at the paper, then looking at her
fully, reluctantly): "Hey back." He swallows a mouthful of cereal and
puts the paper down.

JOEY (hesitantly): "How'd it go?"

JEFF (shrugs, not making light of it, just not sure how to speak about
it): "OK.  No fuss, no heartache." Hesitates.  "No-one got hurt."

Cut to: the second-floor bedroom in the safe house in Seattle.  The
informant is babbling angrily in Hebrew, pointing at the window, while
plain-clothes cops and a couple of uniformed officers mill about.
Taped to the window is a red-and-white bullseye target, with a
close-up picture of the informant, an attractive woman, and a small
dog set in its center.

JOEY relaxes her shoulders slightly.  She sips her coffee, then sets
it down.  "Some people from work are having a dinner tonight," she
says, looking at the coffee.  "We're invited, if you want to go."

JEFF gets a teasing grin on his face.  "We? As in, us? Like, a
couple?"

JOEY (grins back): "Yeah, as in us, like, a couple."

JEFF: "I didn't know you'd told your friends you were seeing someone."

JOEY (the grin becomes a bit wickeder): "I didn't have to.  They could
just tell."  [beat] "'Cept the guys.  Guys are stupid." [beat] "So, do
you wanna go?"

JEFF shrugs.  "Sure.  Yeah, I'd like to." Sips his coffee.  "What
should I wear?"

Cut to: a tray of drinks, held under and in front of a very nice pair
of breasts.  As the owner of the breasts turns, the camera pulls back
to show a rear view of a woman going up two wooden steps on the side
of an outdoor hot tub.  Eight or nine people of varying ages and
genders are in the tub, including Jeff and Joey.  Jeff's eyes are on
the woman with the drinks until Joey elbows him.

Cut to: the naked woman as she steps with a splash into the tub, then
turns to pick up the drinks tray and set it on top of an inflated
duck.  "Try not to get the hummus in the tub," she says with a South
African accent, just a bit anxiously.  "The filters really don't like
it."

As people reach for fresh drinks or nibbles, a balding, but very
fit-looking, man, continues his story.  "So anyway, BTG signed up the
next day, and Francis calls me up, and says, 'Now, what about your
senior citizens discount?'" Everyone laughs politely.

BALDING MAN (swallowing a bit of pita bread with hummus, turning to
Jeff): "So, Joey says you're in the computer business?"

JEFF (nodding, then shrugging): "Sort of.  I'm more on the human side
now."

ANOTHER NAKED WOMAN: "I didn't know there was a human side to
computing."

JEFF (smiling at her): "We keep it pretty well hidden.  Got an image
to live down to, you know."

BALDING MAN (continuing his question): "So you do recruiting, or HR?"

JEFF shakes his head.  "More security than anything else." Beside him,
Joey starts to look a little bit nervous, but Jeff continues smoothly,
"You know---someone leaves a company, nobody remembers to change
passwords, or people write down PIN numbers and entry codes on parking
slips and leave them lying around.  Mostly what goes wrong isn't
computers, it's people being people." He sips his drink, then smiles
at the naked woman again.  "That's probably why it's hard for us geeks
to deal with it."

Cut to: Joey and Jeff sitting on some stairs inside a house, putting
their shoes back on.  The naked woman is there, wearing a loose summer
dress and sandals, with her wet blonde hair combed straight; the
balding man is beside her in a pair of shorts.  Jeff stands up first,
and the balding man sticks out his hand.  As they shake, he says,
"Well, if you ever get bored with what you're doing, give me a call.
There's always someone looking for someone."

JEFF (smiling back like a born salesman): "Thanks very much, but I
don't think I'm gonna get bored any time soon." He puts his arm around
Joey as she stands up, lets go long enough for her to kiss cheeks with
the balding man and the formerly-naked woman.  Everybody says their
goodbyes, then Jeff and Joey leave.

Cut to: Jeff and Joey walking on a flagstone walk under groomed trees
to a semi-circular driveway where three or four up-market cars are
parked.  Jeff says, "They were nice."

JOEY (a bit peeved): "What, you mean her tits? I can't believe how you
were staring at them all night."

JEFF (defensively): "Well, fuck, that's what a trophy wife is for,
isn't it?" Joey stops and stares at him, unbelievingly, then hits him
(not very hard) with her purse.  Jeff says, "Ow! Ow!" until she stops.
They keep walking.  After a few steps, Joey raises the purse to whack
him again; Jeff catches her arm, then slides his hand down it and puts
it around her shoulders.  After a moment, she puts her arm around his
waist and gives him a squeeze.

Cut to: Joey's garden, late in the evening.  Jeff and Joey are curled
together up in a hammock.  Getz and Gilberto's version of Girl from
Ipanema is playing on the stereo in the house.  Both have their eyes
closed.

JEFF (softly, without opening his eyes): "You know, I think you're
beautiful."

JOEY (smiling): "Thank you."

JEFF: "Shh...  I'm talking to your ear here.  I'll get to the rest of
you in a moment." Shifts a bit, starts whispering: "You're so
perfectly curved...  and your lobe is so soft...  mmm..." Joey starts
giggling.  Jeff kisses her, then again, more seriously.  Just then the
phone bleeps.

JOEY: "Poop." She reaches over the side of the hammock and fishes
around on the ground, eventually pulling up a portable phone.
"Hello?"  she says.  "Oh hi, I---what? Oh, no.  Shit.  Yeah, I'll be
right there.  Thanks.  Bye." The phone bleeps as she switches it off.
She sighs and rolls over to Jeff.  "Can you keep that warm for me 'til
later? I have to go."

JEFF: "More work?"

JOEY: "Uh huh.  Paul found a hole in the papers we're supposed to be
filing tomorrow, we have to figure out some way around it." Kisses
him.  "Probably be a late night."

JEFF: "Poop." Kisses her.  "You mind if I spend the evening with the
guys?"

JOEY: "No, sure, go ahead." Pauses.  "What guys?"

JEFF: "McCoy, Worf, Picard...  Not Spock, though.  He never fucking
buys a round."

Cut to: Jeff slouched on the couch watching a black-and-white gangster
movie on television.  He wrinkles his nose, then again: in quick
sequence, the microwave goes bleep!, a gun on TV goes blam!, the
doorbell goes bing-bong!, and he sneezes.  He blinks for a moment,
disoriented, then gets up and goes to the kitchen.  He comes out a
moment later with a bowl of popcorn.  Just as he sits down, the
doorbell rings again.

JEFF: "Oop, shit." He puts the popcorn down on the coffee table, gets
up, and goes off-camera.  We hear the door being opened, then Jeff
saying, "Uh, hi, come on..." Krzezinski walks into the living room,
glances around quickly---window, door, TV, window---then takes off his
jacket and sits down where Jeff was.  He pulls the popcorn bowl closer
to himself and takes a mouthful.  Jeff sits down across from him and
watches him eat for a second.

KRZEZINSKI: "You got any butter? Tastes like those little styrofoam
peanuts they use for packing stuff."

JEFF fishes around his molars with his tongue, thinking about it, then
gets up and goes off-camera.  He comes back a moment later with a
green glass bottle of olive oil and a couple of spice jars.
Krzezinski stops chewing his mouthful of popcorn to watch while Jeff
sprinkles some olive oil on the popcorn, flipping through it with his
fingers to make sure it's evenly spread, then shakes on some spice
from each of the jars.

KRZEZINSKI: "Well la-di-fuckin-da." He picks up one kernel between his
thumb and little finger, examines it critically, sniffs it.
"Cayenne?"

JEFF nods.  "Cayenne and garlic salt.  There's bay and basil in the
olive oil.  Go ahead, it won't kill you."

KRZEZINSKI puts the kernel in his mouth, chews it reflectively,
shrugs.  "Not bad.  You oughta try selling this stuff.  Be the next
great yuppie snack food."

JEFF: "Yeah, maybe I should.  Call it 'Mexitalian Mouthful' or
something."

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, or 'Cajun Corn'.  Cayenne and garlic, people'd
believe that was Cajun." He takes a handful, looks at his fingers.
"You got a paper towel or something?"

JEFF: "Yeah, in the kitchen." Makes no move to get up, just keeps
looking at Krzezinski.

KRZEZINSKI (swallows after a moment): "Mac said things went OK."

JEFF: "Uh huh."

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, the guy's clammed up completely.  No spikka de
English no more, you know?" Puts another few kernels of corn in his
mouth.  "'S the kind of deal I like best.  No loud noises, nothing
that needs mopping up afterward, you don't have to get your shirt
dry-cleaned..." Swallows.  "Got another one of those coming up next
week.  You interested?"

JEFF (flatly, ready to get angry): "In what?"

KRZEZINSKI (after a pause): "You been climbing recently?"

JEFF: "In what, John? What's your fucking pitch?"

KRZEZINSKI: "I ever tell you I used to drive stock cars? Nothing
big-time, but, you know, I had a few races." Licks a bit of oil off
his fingers.  "Then I started doing this, and you know, driving cars
just didn't get me up any more.  Other guys thought I was fuckin'
crazy, cutting corners and crowding and stuff, but it didn't matter
what I did, it just didn't get me up." Looks at Jeff steadily, right
in the eye.  "So like I said, you been climbing recently?"

Jeff drops his eyes first.

Cut to: the front door opening.  Joey comes in, clearly tired, with a
square black briefcase in her hand.  She sets it down, pulls off her
running shoes without unlacing them, picks up the briefcase, walks
through into the living room.  Jeff is asleep on the couch with the
remote in his hand.  The TV is showing models in lingerie on a
late-night shopping channel.  Joey smiles wryly, switches off the TV,
sits down on the couch beside Jeff.  She brushes his hair back from
his forehead, kisses him, then stretches out beside him and nuzzles
his ear.  "You've got pretty good lobes too, you know," she whispers.

JEFF (blinking himself awake): "Mmm?" He hugs her, shifts sideways to
give her more room.  "Howdit go?"

JOEY (yawns): "Lousy.  How was Star Trek?"

JEFF: "Seen it before."

JOEY: "You've seen them all before."

JEFF (after a quiet moment): "John came round."

JOEY (suddenly tired again): "Your John?"

JEFF: "Yeah." Pause.  "Why, what other Johns do you know?"

JOEY: "What did he want?"

JEFF: "'Nother job.  Be away for a couple of days, maybe three."

JOEY (deep breath, lets it out without sighing): "OK.  I'm going to be
fixing this mess of Paul's all next week.  You have some time after to
go away?"

JEFF (relieved): "Yeah, sure.  Where do you want to go?"

JOEY: "Dunno.  Somewhere with a beach."

JEFF: "Sure.  Costa Rica, maybe?"

JOEY: "Whatever." Is silent for a moment.  "Is this job going to be
dangerous?"

JEFF shrugs.  "Yup."

JOEY rolls on top of him.  Her expression is bleak, but there are no
tears in her eyes.  "Come back, Jeff.  OK?"

JEFF (takes her hand, puts it over his heart, makes an 'X'): "I
promise."

Cut to: Jeff, Krzezinski, McFaddyen, and three other hard-looking men
coming out of Boston's Logan Airport into the hard light of a
cloudless day.  Each man has a single carry-on bag; one by one, as
they come into the light, they put on sunglasses.  The music is
Morricone's *The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly*.

Cut to: an elegant old house in the Back Bay.  Two elderly men go by
walking a poodle; a young woman jogs past them in a sweatshirt and
black Lycra leggings.  The cars are all shiny and clean.  A cab pulls
up; one by one, as *The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly* fades out,
Krzezinski and Jeff get out.  They stand side by side for a moment,
looking up at the house, then go up the steps single file to the front
door.

Cut to: the foyer of the house as the doorbell rings softly.  A
middle-aged man in expensive casual clothes appears after a moment to
unlock and open it.

Cut to: outside the house, looking in.  "Yes?" asks the middle-aged
man.

KRZEZINSKI (with a thick accent): "It's Boris.  Bring me to Natasha!"

MIDDLE-AGED MAN: "Excuse me?"

KRZEZINSKI (in his normal voice): "That was a joke.  Mrs.  B.  is
expecting us."

MIDDLE-AGED MAN: "Just a moment, please." He closes and re-locks the
door.  Seconds pass.  The door is unlocked and re-opened.  "Come in,
please.  She'll see you in the drawing room."

Cut to: Krzezinski and Jeff being shown into a large room with a bare
wooden floor.  It is empty except for a workbench, a stool, and a
large easel, on which sits the beginning of a charcoal sketch of the
view through the room's bay window.  A woman in her mid-sixties, dried
out but still handsome, stands and offers her hand to Krzezinski.

MRS.  B.: "John, how nice to see you again."

KRZEZINSKI (shaking her hand): "You too, ma'am.  This is Jeff Rudiger.
He's new to the team."

MRS.  B.  (shaking hands): "How do you do?" Turns back to Krzezinski.
"May I offer you some coffee?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Sure, thank you."

MRS.  B.: "David---could you ask Ming-An to make us some coffee,
please? We'll take it in the sun room." The middle-aged man nods and
disappears.

KRZEZINSKI: "He's new, isn't he?"

MRS.  B.: "Yes.  I found him at an antique sale in Brookline last
year.  I think his friends make fun of him for it."

KRZEZINSKI: "And is he...?"

MRS.  B.: "Oh, you can talk in front of David.  He knows what not to
hear." She smiles slightly, looking at Jeff.  "And what not to touch.
I tease him so sometimes." Jeff gulps, quietly but perceptibly.

Cut to: the solarium.  The shot is from inside a room whose main
decorations are a piano and a shelf full of books and framed
photographs.  The room is visible through sliding glass doors, both of
which are open.  Krzezinski and Mrs.  B.  are sitting in the solarium
sipping coffee; Jeff is looking at the books and photographs.  We hear
Mrs.  B.  and Krzezinski talking, but not clearly enough to make out
the words.

Jeff puts down one photograph, picks up another in black and white
showing a younger Mrs.  B.  in a nightclub with her arm around a
portly Latin gentleman in a white suit.  He puts that down, picks up
the next one---and freezes.  It's Gatsby and his wife from the harbor
in Nova Scotia, standing with Mrs.  B.  beside *Thanks, Grandma* in a
harbor in summer.  Jeff looks at it for a long moment, then sets it
down and steps through the sliding doors to join Krzezinski and Mrs.
B.

Cut to: the solarium.  Mrs.  B.  is speaking: "...for twelve months,
even longer."

KRZEZINSKI: "I'll do what I can, ma'am, but I can't make any
promises."

MRS.  B.  (a bit sharply): "I've never asked you for promises, John,
just for results." Looks up at Jeff, smiling mechanically.  "How is
your coffee, Mister Rudiger?"

JEFF: "Um, fine, thanks.  Ma'am."

KRZEZINSKI (swallowing the last of his, standing): "I'll leave a
message at the usual number." Offers his hand to Mrs.  B., who, having
stood, shakes it lightly.

MRS.  B.: "Thank you, John.  Good luck, both of you."

Cut to: outside the mansion as the door closes behind them.  They walk
down the steps in silence, turn left when they hit the street.  It's a
cold, clear day.

KRZEZINSKI (after a few steps): "She's as nutty as a Mars Bar, but
damn, she makes good coffee."

JEFF stops, grabs Krzezinski by the lapel, pushes him against the
fence.  Krzezinski says, "Hey!" and brings his hands up as if to block
a punch.  Jeff glares at him for a moment, then spreads his hands in
frustrated confusion and says, "John---what the hell is going on here?
Did you see her pictures? It's the guy from the fucking yacht!"

KRZEZINSKI (glances around): "Hey, shush, not here."

JEFF: "Yes, here.  Here and now.  Who is she?"

KRZEZINSKI shrugs.  "His grandmother, I think." Digs at his ear with a
finger, looks critically at his finger tip, flicks something away,
looks at Jeff again.

JEFF (disbelief and outrage together): "Does she know that you...?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Offed him? Nope.  Even Mrs.  B.  would have a hard time
with that." Pause.  "And, uh, it wasn't just me, remember? You were
there too."

JEFF: "Yeah, I remember.  So what's this?  A setup?  Some kind of
sting?"

KRZEZINSKI (a bit bored): "Nope.  It's just a job.  She's got
competition she doesn't like, she wants us to help out.  'S kinda
traditional 'round here, you know?  Most of these guys" (waves at the
houses) "got their start bootlegging.  She's just---"

JEFF: "I thought you worked for the government.  Isn't that what you
told me? I, I think I remember you telling me that."

KRZEZINSKI is quiet as a pretty girl with a nose ring goes by.  When
he starts talking again, his voice is quiet, but intense.  "Yeah, I
work for the government.  And when they don't have a job for me, and
I've got bills to pay, I work for Mrs.  B., or the Canadians, or the
fucking Pope if he's got work.  And you know? It's because I'm a pro.
Pros don't care what team they play for.  Today it's the Raiders,
tomorrow it's Dallas, they don't care.  They just throw the ball and
catch the ball and run as hard as they fucking can, because that's
what they do.  You think a pro stops playing just because he's been
traded?  Bullshit! What makes a guy a pro is, one day he's trying to
tear your lungs out, the next day you're in the line beside him, he
doesn't care.  All he cares about is the fucking game."

Jeff and Krzezinski stare at each other for a moment.  Finally
Krzezinski sighs.  "You're a real handful, you know?" Waits a moment
for Jeff to answer, then sighs again.  "Come on, we got a long drive
ahead of us."

Cut to: a man flipping steaks on a barbecue outside a hunting lodge in
a small clearing.  It's been raining recently; the sky is still gray.
We hear feet running on grass for an instant.  The man looks up, then
gets half a shout out while reaching to pull a gun from underneath his
parka before a silenced shot takes him in the chest.  As he falls he
knocks over the table carrying the steaks and bottles of ketchup and
mustard.  It starts to go over.

Cut to: Jeff and another man we haven't seen before, crouching in wet
undergrowth.  The other man has a camouflage satchel on his back with
something blocky in it.  They hear the 'crash!' of the table going
over.  Jeff tenses to start sprinting, but the other man growls, "Not
yet."

Cut to: two men we haven't seen before, in hunting jackets, with
machine pistols in their hands.  Their backs are against the outside
wall of the hunting lodge on either side of a door.  A third man joins
them, breathing hard.  He nods, then steps between the camera and the
door and kicks the door open.  A shotgun blast takes him in the chest,
splattering the camera.

Cut to: Jeff and Satchel Man.  Satchel Man growls, "OK, now!" They
sprint out of the woods toward the back of the hunting lodge.

Cut to: the two men at the front of the lodge, both crouching down.
The one on the left has stuck his arm out to fire bursts blindly into
the lodge.  The one on the right is fumbling with a grenade.  There is
a momentary lull just as he gets the pin out.  We hear a window being
opened.  He looks up.

Cut to: the POV of the man with the grenade, as he looks up into the
barrel of an automatic being held by a man leaning out of the window
above his head.  We see the muzzle burst.

Cut to: the lodge's kitchen door slamming open, Jeff and Satchel Man
coming through with guns in their hands.  They rush past the camera;
as the door swings closed behind them, there is a *punk* as a bullet
hole appears in it.

Cut to: Jeff and Satchel Man taking wooden stairs three at a time.

Cut to: Jeff and Satchel Man entering a room done up as an office.  A
computer is sitting on the desk.  Jeff waits at the door, trying to
watch both ways at once.  Satchel Man sits in front of the computer,
puts the satchel on the table beside the computer, and is shot in the
back by a man standing behind the window curtain.  Jeff screams (not
shouts, but screams) and fires on automatic.  The bullets throw the
guard backward through the window.  As Jeff stares at Satchel Man's
body, there is a burst of gunfire in the hallway.  He slams the door
shut and starts looking around frantically.  "Shit," he mutters.
"Shit, shit, shit." The walkie-talkie on his belt squawks.

KRZEZINSKI (on the walkie-talkie, weakly): "Jesus...  Aw, fuckin'
Jesus.  'S anyone there?"

JEFF: "Yes!" He pulls the walkie-talkie from his belt and thumbs it.
"John! John! Where are you?"

KRZEZINSKI (gasping): "I'm fuckin' dead is where I am.  Fuckin'
puppies took my fuckin' legs.  Where are you, lad?"

JEFF (still looking around): "I'm in the house.  I found the computer.
Page is dead."

KRZEZINSKI: "Have you got the package?"

JEFF: "Yes, it's here, but Page is dead.  Where are you?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Listen up, lad.  You've got to set the package.  Do you
understand?" He coughs, wetly.

JEFF: "I don't know how.  And I don't fucking know how I'm going to
get out of here.  There's guys in the hall with guns."

KRZEZINSKI: "Don't think there's an out for either of us this time."
He coughs again, a deep, hacking sound.  "Fuck.  I think I've just
pissed myself.  Jeff? You there?"

JEFF (quietly frantic, close to tears): "Jesus.  Jesus, John, what am
I going to do?"

VOICE IN THE CORRIDOR (shouting a question in Russian): "Mumble mumble
mumble?"

JEFF (shouting at the top of his lungs): "Fuck off!" In a normal voice
into the walkie-talkie, "John, what do I do?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Set the fuckin' package.  Jeff, you have to set the
fuckin' package, do you hear me?"

JEFF (now staring at the satchel like a rabbit at a snake, instead of
trying to watch everything at once): "Uh, I'm not sure I can do that,
John.  I, uh, don't think I've got a way out of here if I do."

KRZEZINSKI (angry, but weak): "None of us are fuckin' get out of here
this time, didn't you hear me?" More coughing.  "I've got no fuckin'
legs, McFaddyen's got no fuckin' head, we're not gettin' out of this
one.  Do you read me? Just set the fuckin' package and then get your
dick out and start stroking."

JEFF (tears in his eyes): "John..." He blinks.

KRZEZINSKI (quietly, but with great strength): "You turnin' puppy on
me, Jeff? You fuckin' turnin' puppy on me now?"

There are more shouts in Russian from the corridor, this time in a
bargaining tone of voice.  Jeff grabs his rifle and fires two quick
shots through the door, then picks up his walkie-talkie again.
"You'll have to walk me through it," he says.  He pushes the chair
with Satchel Man in it out of the way, then pulled a coffee table over
to sit on instead.  Its lowness makes him look childishly small.

KRZEZINSKI (talking while Jeff's hands move, hesitating sometimes, but
always precise): "OK, snaps on top of the bag, you've got to undo
those.  Have you got those? OK, there's a dial on the front, do you
see that? With a couple of switches on the, on the, um..."

JEFF: "On the right."

KRZEZINSKI: "Yeah, the right.  Flip the first one, then set the timer,
then flip the second one to start it going, you got that?"

JEFF: "Got it.  How much time should I set it for?"

KRZEZINSKI: "Up to you.  You don't have to set it for anything if you
don't want to.  Just hit the second switch."

JEFF (hesitates, then spins the dial---we can't see how far.  He sits
back to look at the bomb, raises the walkie-talkie to his ear):
"Done."  Pauses a few seconds.  "I'm gonna get my dick out now, OK?"

Cut to: the hunting lodge seen through a pair of binoculars.
Krzezinski's voice says, "You do that." A man with a rifle is briefly
seen running in front of the house.  Nothing moves for a moment, and
then the house shakes as all its windows are blown out by an explosion
on the far side.  As the sound of the blast reaches the camera, we see
a tongue of flame leaping up from the other side of the house,
followed by a gray belch of smoke.

Cut to: Krzezinski lowering the binoculars.  He and McFaddyen are
sitting in the jeep with the remains of a brown-bag sandwich lunch on
the dashboard in front of them.  Krzezinski switches off the
walkie-talkie and reaches for the jeep's gear stick.  McFaddyen is
looking at him without expression.  Krzezinski catches his partner's
eye.

KRZEZINSKI (defensively): "What? What?"

MCFADDYEN (shrugs and shakes his head): "Let's go."

Cut to: a rear shot of the jeep, climbing a muddy road through the
trees, as the credits roll.
