Noxy had a dream that night.  She often had dreams, or told herself stories in
her head while she was waiting to fall asleep that were no more logical than the
average dream.  Sometimes, when her stories were particularly exciting, she'd
mutter bits of dialog out loud until her mother said, "Who are you talking to?"
and Noxy would say, "No one," and roll over and pull the blanket up under her
chin and close her eyes and carry on saving the prince from the magician or the
magician from the prince or both of them from an avalanche.

But that night's dream wasn't one of those.  She didn't swoop down at the last
moment on a cloud moments ahead of a roaring wave of snow.  She didn't do battle
with an angry pack of lightnings armed only with her courage and a magic sword
while Rash and Sensy and the rest of the village cheered her on.

No, this dream wasn't one of those. This dream was troubled and strange.  The
tiger was in it, as large as a house.  The crows were in it too, but they were
skeletons decorated with feathers and they were pecking chunks out of the people
around her who were slowly losing shape like weary clouds.

And there, standing in the middle of everything, was the troll she had seen that
morning.  It---she---had the same silver-shot fur and the same long scar, but
her eyes were like those deep shadows in the forest where the last of the winter
snow could lie unmelted until midsummer.  She waited patiently until the last of
the crows had flown away and then raised a hand in greeting.

Heart pounding, Noxy raised her own, and woke.  She lay in bed listening to the
wind outside her window and the soft, rhythmic snuffle of her mother snoring in
the room below her until her breathing slowed, then fumbled on the two-drawer
dresser beside her bed.  Her hand closed on the little brass lamp her father had
given her when she had first started reading.  She hadn't set it out that
morning to recharge it, but the thumbnail-sized piece of dayglass inside it
still gleamed when she opened its cover.

She set it on the dresser and lay back.  The little mirror that hung on her door
opposite her bed reflected the lamplight back at her.  If she turned sideways in
bed and stretched, she could almost touch the door with her toes now.  The room
was still big enough for her and Sensy to sit and gossip, but the last time Rash
had joined them, it had somehow seemed much too small.

She sighed.  She had been planning to talk to Sensy and find out if she and Rash
were made at each other, but with everything that had happened that day...
*Tomorrow*, she promised herself, reaching for the dayglass lamp and twisting
the cover closed.

She held it in her hand for a second, wondering if the dayglass stopped shining
when there was nowhere for the light to go or whether the light bounced around
being reabsorbed over and over again.  Maybe that's what dreams were---ideas
bouncing around inside her head until they found a way out.  She'd have to tell
Granna Fee... in... the morning...

Moments later, the syncopated rhythm of two people snoring wafted through the
litle house.
