*Consider Cherne.  A diamond adrift in the heavens, it measures eight thousand
gallops from north to south and six thousand from east to west.  Its single
continent is surrounded on all sides by a great ocean whose outer shore, the
Worldrim, rises up to cradle that sweet speck of life as a child might cup a
drop of water in her hand.*

*Cherne's history began with the Pilots, and nearly ended with them as well.
Powerful and inhuman, their reign ended in a war that scarred the moon and
turned Lake Karaband into a sea of glass.  When it was over the Pilots were
gone, leaving the world to carry on as best it could.*

*Now look there, in the north, where the Brumoso Mountains rise above the
endless squabbles of the Ninety Kingdoms.  it is Redsday, the 11th of Peridot,
1272, and a girl who is no longer a child but not quite yet a woman is crouched
on a cloud, chilled to the bone and desperately hoping that they're not too
late...*

"Hold on!" Grappa Gas bellowed.  "It's going to get bumpy!"

Noxy dropped to one knee, pulled the glove off her left hand, and pressed her
palm against the cloud beneath her.  She could mind-hear Big Blue's
determination, but the cloud was old, older even than Grappa Gas, and they were
flying straight into a headwind.

*Faster!* she urged.  *Please, faster!* She shivered despite her goofskin hat
and coat, her hand already numbed by the icy mountain air.

Beside her, the tiger snarled as the last of the crows that had attacked them
swirled overhead.  One dove at his head.  He reared up and swiped at it with one
paw, cursing in Thindi as the black bird snapped its wings open and let the wind
throw it sideways just an instant before the tiger's claws would have torn it
apart.

Up ahead, a makeshift camp sat on a barren pinnacle of rock that rose like an
island out of the forest.  A dozen drab gray tents huddled around a small fire.
Shading her eyes with her right hand, Noxy saw that the soldiers had formed a
circle around it.  Their kilts and sturdy boots were travel-stained, and their
battle masks and lacquered leather armor were scarred from fighting.  Some had
swords in their hands, while others held spears or bows.  Big Blue's mate Pillow
floated above them, her sides rippling as she struggled to keep station in the
wind, but the soldiers only spared an occasional pleading glance for the two
clouds.  They were looking at the trees around them, waiting for the forest to
attack again.

"You're coming in too low!" Granna Fee yelled.  Noxy's grandmother lay full
length on Big Blue, propped up on her elbows with a pair of binoculars in her
hands.  "Level him off!"

"There's no time!" Grappa Gas yelled back, his red-and-yellow scarf flapping
madly behind him.  "We're going to have to bump and scrape!"  The old man closed
his eyes.  His lips moved as he mind-spoke commands to the cloud beneath him.
Noxy mind-heard the old bull protest, but even as he grumbled he bunched up and
went into a steep dive.

Noxy had just a moment to think, *I'd be grounded for a __month__ if I even
__thought__ about doing something like this,* and then the cloud thudded against
the side of the peak like a sack full of wet wool.  Nox yelped and sprawled
forward to land in an untidy heap beside Granna Fee.  "Sorry!" she said, but her
grandmother was already up, swaying to keep her balance as the cloud scraped
across bare rock, flattened two tents, and came to a halt.

The tiger bounded off with a roar.  "What are you waiting for!?" Granna Fee
shouted at the soldiers, sliding down Big Blue's flank and waving her arm as if
to sweep them all onto the cloud.  "Get on! Get on!"

As Noxy scrambled to her feet, Grappa Gas caught her arm.  "I'll help 'em up.
You stay here and keep Blue together."  Without waiting for her to answer he
stumped forward, his peg leg leaving dimples in the cloud.  "And keep an eye out
for squirrels!" he added over his shoulder.

Noxy glanced back just in time to see something big and brown swing between two
trees below them.  Another hairy shape followed it, then another, and suddenly
the trees were full of them, hooting and shaking the branches.

"Grappa!  Grappa, there's trolls!" she shouted.

"I see 'em!" the old man shouted back.

"And a bear!" Noxy added as a brown bear charged out of the trees and reared up
on its hind legs with a roar.  The muscles under its thick fur bunched as it
dropped back to all fours to charge forward a few steps, halt, and roar again.

"'Course there's a bear," Grappa Gas grunted as he clasped hands with the
nearest soldier and helped him scramble up onto the cloud.  A second soldier
tossed his spear aside and pulled himself up beside the first.  Together, they
reached back and hauled up a third man while Grappa Gas reached for a fourth.

But instead of grabbing the cloudherd's hand, the man on the ground lifted a
heavy canvas-wrapped bundle.  "Never mind that, get yourself up here!" Grappa
Gas ordered.

"We're not leaving them!" the man on the ground yelled back.  One of the
soldiers already on the cloud shouldered Grappa Gas aside, grabbed a corner of
the canvas, and tried to drag it onto the cloud.  His legs sank halfway to his
knees with the weight.

Noxy felt Big Blue shudder underneath her.  She dropped to her knees and pressed
her hand against the cloud once again.  *Just a little longer,* she pleaded,
trying to squelch her fear so that he couldn't mind-hear it.  *Stay bunched up
just a little longer.* She pictured the cloud pulling itself into a dense blob.
Obediently the cloud began to contract.

Even as it did so, Noxy heard a shrill warning whistle from her friends on board
Pillow high above them.  Cold fear jellied in her gut as the trolls suddenly
stopped hooting.

"Grappa---" she started to say.

"Just keep him together!" Grappa Gas snapped.  Cursing, he yanked another
soldier up onto the cloud.  This one was just a boy, Noxy realized, no older
than she was with a frightened, determined look on his scarred face.  He took
two steps before his feet slipped out from underneath him and sent him sprawling
beside one of the half-dozen canvas-wrapped bundles that lay together in a pile.

The tiger scrambled up the cloud behind him.  Noxy mind-heard Big Blue's protest
as the great cat's claws tore wisps off his flank.  *Just a little longer,* she
begged.  *Please, just a little longer.*

She glanced at the forest.  A brown wave spilled back and forth around the bases
of the trees.  Above it, the trolls began hooting again.  "Now now now!" the
Gifted ones shouted, the will of the forest surging through their minds like a
raging flood.  "Get them get them get them!"

"Spread yourselves out, you numbskulls!" Grappa Gas thundered at the soldiers
struggling not to sink into the cloud.  "Spread-eagle if you have to.  Come on,
Fee, we gotta fly!"

Noxy's grandmother clambered up Big Blue's flank with a speed born from decades
of practice.  "Now or never!" she yelled at the soldier who had been lifting up
the bundles.  He grabbed a handful of cloud just as a swarm of squirrels burst
out of the forest and surged up the rocky slope, thousands of them leaping from
stone to stone, their tiny eyes fixed on the intruders and just one thought in
their minds.

*Up!* Noxy mind-yelled at Big Blue.  The cloud heaved himself into the air.  As
the soldiers shouted and toppled over she heard Grappa Gas shout, "Hold on!"

The last soldier clung desperately to Big Blue as the cloud's flank squished
between his fingers like soggy dough.  The oncoming squirrels jumped at his
legs.  One managed to catch hold of his boot.  It scrambled up the laces and
sank its teeth into his calf.  The soldier cursed and kicked it off.  With a
last desperate lunge he managed to catch hold of Grappa Gas's hand.

"You idiot!" Grappa Gas yelled as he pulled the soldier up onto Big Blue's back.
"You saints-be-damned *idiot*!  They woulda peeled you like an apple!  What was
so weeping important that you couldn't just leave it?"  He kicked one of the
bundles at his feet.  "Eh?  What was so---urp!"

In one smooth motion the soldier had rolled onto his feet and grabbed a handful
of Grappa Gas's collar.  "With respect, honored, I'm grateful for the rescue,"
he panted, "But that's one of my men you're kicking, and I'll be thanking you to
stop."

He let go of Grappa Gas's coat.  The cloudherd coughed.  "Ah.  Sorry, lad.  I
didn't realize."  He looked down at the bodies lying at his feet.  "I'm sorry."

The soldier nodded.  "Me too."  He stared back at the pinnacle of rock, where
the squirrels had already torn the tents to pieces.  "Me too."

---

*Earlier that day...*

Noxy and Sensy volunteered to collect spiderwebs that morning---or rather, Noxy
volunteered them both and Sensy went along with it like she always did.  Winter
had finally turned to spring; stubborn crusts of snow still lurked in the
shadows of the twisted mountain pines, but the sun shone diamond-bright in a
clear blue sky, and carding camel wool indoors suddenly seemed unbearable.
Besides, getting out of the village would give them a chance for a talk that
Noxy thought was long overdue.

"Shoo."  She poked a fat brown spider with a stick.  It waved its hairy forelegs
at her indignantly before scuttling away to make a new home.  Noxy cut its web's
anchor threads with two practiced twists of her knife and began winding it onto
a stick.

"Do you think I should put new buttons on my coat?" Sensy asked.

Noxy glanced at her.  "Why? Are those ones coming loose?"  She had been trying
for an hour to think of a way to broach the subject of their mutual friend Rash,
who was the only boy their age in the village of Stale.

"No, they're just kind of plain." Sensy looked down at her soft brown goofskin
coat critically.  "Granna Fee has some really nice red ones.  She said she'd
give them to me if I picked the stones out of her pepper garden."

"Her whole garden? That would take forever." Noxy shook the dew off the spider's
web and stuffed it into the loosely-woven bag slung over her shoulder.  "Why
would you do all that work for buttons you don't need?"

"Oh, you're no help," Sensy pouted.  She had spent the winter embroidering red
and green patterns on her jacket's cuffs and collar.  All she seemed to want to
talk about any more was her clothes, and her hair, and the boys she and Noxy
might meet that summer.  The only thing she *didn't* want to talk about was
Rash.

"A lot of girls are like that when they get their changes," Granna Fee had said
when Noxy had complained about the flighty stranger who seemed to have taken her
best friend's place.

"Not me!" Noxy had declared.

Her grandmother had laughed.  "No, sweetling, not you."

The three children had grown up together, done chores together, played tag and
make-believe in the forest around Stale together, and learned to mind-speak with
clouds together, but something had changed that winter.  Sometimes Noxy saw
Sensy look at Rash, or Rash look at Sensy, and then look away as if they felt
guilty or were afraid they might blurt out a secret.  Other times they just sat
there not speaking.  If her two best friends were mad at one another, Noxy
thought it was her job go sort it out.

Noxy slung her bag over her shoulder.  "Come on, let's go look for some more."
She set off without waiting for an answer.  A moment later Sensy scrambled to
catch up with her.

The path was one of dozens that snaked through the evergreen forest surrounding
Stale.  Mud made it slippery where it wasn't slick with ice, but Noxy didn't
slow down until she reached the ridge above her home.

Below her lay the ancient walls of the fortress that held the village of Stale.
The centuries had rounded the edges off the Pilots' stonework, making it look
like a snow fort that was just starting to melt, but it was still as solid as
the mountains themselves.  The villagers' two-story wooden houses sheltered
inside the fortress like ducklings in a nest.  Thin licks of smoke rose from
their slate chimneys, while goof pens, vegetable plots, and racks laden with
drying spiderwebs filled the spaces between them.

To the west, the wall dropped straight into a steep-sided gorge.  A net woven
from spider thread stretched over its top, as light as a dream but as strong as
steel.  Another net hung down at the gorge's mouth to make a gate.  Inside, just
visible from the ridge, two gray clouds floated half-asleep.

Noxy had spent every moment she could that winter watching the clouds, riding
them, and, most importantly, practicing mind-speech with them.  Grownups called
Big Blue and Pillow slow and lazy, but they and the herd of half-wild clouds
grazing on the mountain peaks in the distance were the most exciting things in
Noxy's world.

As Noxy pulled her bag off her shoulder, Sensy grabbed her arm.  "Look!"  she
hissed, pointing into the trees.

At first all Noxy saw was branches.  Then a pair of dark eyes blinked, and her
mouth went dry.  Black fur framed a round face with heavy brows and a gray
muzzle.  The troll blinked again and pulled a branch aside with one long, hairy
arm.

Noxy and Sensy took a step back, then another.  A sudden rustling behind them
made them freeze.  With her breath caught in her throat, Noxy looked over her
shoulder.  A second troll hung by one hand from a branch behind them, blocking
their escape.

"Wh-what are they doing here?" Sensy whispered loudly.

"Ssh!" Noxy said.  "Just... don't... move."

Branches rustled overhead.  Two--- three--- four trolls swung by, except no, the
fourth didn't swing by.  It stopped and looked down at them.  Its fur was shot
through with gray, and even from five strides below it Noxy could see the long
red scar that ran up the length of its left leg.

Something twinged in the back of her head like the start of a headache.  She
felt dizzy, and for a moment it was as if *she* was in the tree looking down at
herself.

A sudden roar broke the moment. The troll hooted and vanished into the forest.
Noxy and Sensy each let out a long shaky breath---

---and screamed as a tiger burst out of the trees half a dozen strides in front
of them.  His fur was yellow-brown with dark brown stripes, not orange and black
like the picture in the book that three generations of village children had
passed around.  A pair of golden earrings hung from his left ear, and his tail
twitched slightly as he looked at them, as if their presence reminded him that
he had not yet eaten lunch.

"Are you all right?" he rumbled.

"Wh-what?" Noxy stammered.

"Are... you... all... right?" the tiger repeated impatiently.  "Did those
blasted chimpanzees harm you at all?"

"No, they---I mean, we're all right.  We're fine, thank you very much.  Ouch,
Sensy, you're going to break my fingers!"  Noxy pulled her hand free from her
friend's terrified grip.

"Pilots be praised," he rumbled, settling onto his haunches.  "Now, if I may ask
a favor, I am looking for the village of Stale Leftovers.  Would you be so kind
as to direct me?"  His ear twitched at the sound of a distant hoot.  "Or if
perchance you are going that way yourselves, I would be honored to accompany
you.  Those creatures are unlikely to try another attack if you have a
protector."

Noxy hitched her bag up on her shoulder.  "They didn't attack us.  We---I mean,
the village has an arrangement.  With the trolls.  We don't go too far into the
forest, and they don't come near the village except for when they want to trade,
and they leave some stones down by the fish pond to tell us when they want to do
that, and---" She stopped herself and took a deep breath.  "I'm sorry.  Who are
you?"

"I am Kulbinder of Thind," the tiger said, rising to all fours.  "And if you
will forgive my impatience, my need is rather pressing.  My companions are in
danger, and in dire need of rescue.  It may already be too late---I need to
reach Stale Leftovers *now*."

Noxy shot a look at Sensy.  Her friend shook her head slightly and mouthed "no".
That was enough to make up Noxy's mind.

"It's this way," she said, pointing down the path.  "Come on!"

It only took them a few minutes to reach the gap in the fortress wall where an
enormous stone door had once hung.  A few chunks of its shattered remains lay
half-buried in the ground, too big for even a team of sturdy mountain camels to
pull free.  The wooden gate that Stale's human inhabitants had put up to fill
the gap was three planks thick, but still looked like a child's toy set into the
Pilots' ancient work.

Grappa Gas was sitting on one of the stones whittling a new leg when they came
out of the trees.  He raised a hand in hello, then swore and clambered to his
feet at the sight of the tiger.  "Saints and their creations!"  He pointed
accusingly with his whittling knife.  "What in the underhells is this?"

"*This* is a who, not a what," Kulbinder replied curtly, his tail bristling.

"We met him up by the spider grove," Noxy said hurriedly.  "There were some
trolls, and he scared them off.  He says---"

"Trolls?"  Grappa Gas interrupted incredulously.  "Can't be.  They haven't come
down this far in---"

"Grappa!"  Noxy stomped her foot.  "Never mind that now!  The tiger says people
are hurt and need help.  At least, I think they're people," she added.

"They are as human as you are," the tiger said.  "Are you the *tralpa* here, or
the reeve?"

Grappa Gas snorted.  "Not likely, but I can take you to them."

Ten minutes later, the whole village was in the cobbled square---or rather, the
whole village minus most of the adults, who had left a week ago for the
snowfields to collect Stale's clouds from their winter pasture.  Three hundred
people, from babies in their parents' arms to those babies' grandparents, stood
in a half-circle around the impatient tiger.  Some still wore the thick coats
and pants they used in winter and when cloudherding.  Others, like Noxy and
Sensy, had switched to lighter gear that would still seem heavy to anyone
unfamiliar with the icy winds of the high mountains.  Grappa Gas's son Aft, who
had been splitting logs with an ax to make shingles, was the only one in
shirtsleeves, but he wasn't the only one scowling at the new arrival.

Noxy's mother Indy thumped the speaker's drum three times and stepped up onto
the squared-off stone that marked the center of the square.  "Friends," she said
loudly, patting the air with her hands to quiet everyone.  "Friends, please.
Thank you all for coming.  I know it is early in the year for travelers, but
please, give a true mountain welcome to Kulbinder, a Gifted of Thind."

"Welcome... welcome... be welcome..." Some voices were hearty, some grudging,
and some people didn't speak at all, but Noxy's mother took it all in stride,
just as she always did.

Someone nudged Noxy's shoulder with their own.  "Hey," Rash said, slipping
between her and Sensy.  "Where's the *tralpa*?  Is he too afraid of the tiger to
come out and say hello?  Or has he been up all night 'studying' again?"  He
mimed someone drinking from a bottle.

"Ssh!"  But he was right---the king's representative was nowhere to be seen.

Indy thumped the brightly-painted speaker's drum again.  "The Gifted has told me
that he and his companions were trying to get through the pass to Chaghan.  An
avalanche forced them off the road and into the forest."  She swept her gaze
across the assembled villagers.  "The forest got angry.  Some of them have died,
and the rest are trapped.  They need our help."

A murmur ran through the crowd.  The Herd of Trees that blanketed the Brumoso
Mountains wasn't mad like the Jungle of Thind, but it guarded its territory and
privileges as jealously as a mother bear guarded her cubs.  Gifted creatures who
lived among the trees all did its biding.  People who stayed near the Pilots'
ancient roads never came to harm, and those who ventured deeper were safe as
long as they were careful.  Make a fire too large, though, or wander into one of
the circles of towering redwoods that Granna Fee cautioned Noxy and her friends
to steer clear of on training flights, and the forest's wrath would be as
merciless as a winter storm.

Aft clapped his hands twice, but didn't wait for Indy to call on him.  "Are they
smugglers?" he asked loudly.

Noxy saw rather than heard her mother's exasperated sigh.  "Not that the Gifted
has said, no."

"Then why in the saints' names were they trying to get through the pass this
time of year?  It'll be another month at least before the high trails clear."
He crossed his brawny arms.  "Doesn't seem like something honest folk would do,
is all I'm saying."

"My companions are not 'honest folk'," the tiger said loudly.  "They are
soldiers."

The crowd murmured again.  "Oh, now that's weeping marvelous," Aft said
sarcastically.  "Mind telling us whose side you're on?"

At that, the tiger finally looked at him.  "They have the privilege of serving
the Learned Shudarga."

That brought gasps instead of murmurs.  As a brilliant young scholar, Shudarga
had written pamphlet after pamphlet arguing that Gandan's laws should be free
for all to use.  The kingdom's merchant-nobles had ignored her at first, or made
jokes about her, but when she started organizing peasants and tradesmen, their
laughter turned to anger.  Arrested, she had escaped the previous summer and
raised her flag in rebellion, attracting thousands to her cause, but then winter
had come and news from the lowlands had slowed to a trickle, leaving the
cloudherds with nothing but rumors.

"Does that mean King Denpa's boys are going to come looking for you?"  Grappa
Gas demanded, ignoring Indy's insistent clapping for order.  "Because if they
do, these walls won't keep 'em out for long."

The tiger's tail twitched.  "I did not come to your village for its walls,
honored.  My companions need help, and you are their only hope.  If you are
afraid it will bring more trouble than you can chew, say so and I will be on my
way."

"Nobody is saying we won't help," Indy said firmly.  "And as long as I'm reeve,
nobody is *going* to say that."  She shot a warning glare at Grappa Gas as he
opened his mouth, and a second at Aft to silence him as well.  "We can argue
about the politics later.  Right now, there's folk in trouble, and I won't have
it said that the people of this village ever turned their backs on those that
needed help."

*Clap clap.* Granna Fee waited for Indy to nod at her before speaking. "What
about the *tralpa*?  I expect he's going to have something to say about us
helping rebels."

Indy's smile was as cold as the distant peaks.  "I'll ask him when he wakes up."

---

The next five minutes were chaos.  Out of the question, Grappa Gas said,
whacking his wooden leg with his cane to emphasize his points.  The law might
forgive them giving shelter to a bunch of strays who wandered in out of a storm,
even if they were rebels, but flying off to rescue their friends?

And what would other cloudherds say if they heard that Stale had left people in
the forest to die, Aft shot back.  Pilots and saints, what would their own kin
say when they got back from up the mountain?

The argument swirled and churned across the cobblestones.  Little whirlpools of
disagreement came together, spun about, and flew apart as people overheard
neighbors they disagreed with, or turned around to agree with something they had
overheard and were sucked into yet another "what if?"

"This is going to go on forever," Noxy said sourly.  "They all know they're
going to do whatever my *amma* want to do in the end---why don't they just get
on with it?"  She, Sensy, and Rash stayed together in a knot on the sidelines,
old enough that they hadn't grown bored and run off to play like the younger
children, but young enough that the whole thing seemed vaguely ridiculous.

Rash ran a finger along the lip fuzz he insisted on calling a mustache.  It had
become a habit over the winter, one that Noxy had told him countless times he
ought to break before *someone* broke his stupid finger.  "What I want to know
is whether we're going to get to go, or if we're going to be stuck here with the
littles."

"Of course we'll get to go!" Noxy exclaimed.

"Are you sure?"  Rash raised an eyebrow, another annoying habit he had
cultivated over the winter.

Noxy puffed an annoyed breath, biting off her "of course I'm sure!"  when she
caught Sensy's uncertain look.  "Wait here," she said with a scowl.

She strode through the crowd to the speaker's stone and caught her mother's
eye.  Before Noxy could speak, Indy said, "Oh, and I think you've met my
daughter, Probably Noxious."

"The honor was mine," the tiger rumbled, flicking an ear in what might have been
the feline equivalent of a very small bow.

Noxy hesitated, wondering if she was supposed to bow back, and was immediately
annoyed at herself.  Cloudherds didn't bow---that was a silly lowlander custom.
"Just call me Noxy," she told him.  "*Amma*, which cloud do you want me and
Sensy and Rash on?  We can go and start getting them ready while everyone's
still jawing."

Indy gave her daughter a look that Noxy knew all too well.  "Who said anything
about you three going?"

But Noxy knew her mother almost as well as her mother knew her, and had
assembled her arguments as she crossed the square.  They were definitely old
enough---why, they were all going to be riding *real* clouds in a few weeks, not
just tame old pair floating about in the cloud pen.  And they wouldn't be going
far, just a few gallops down the pass, and it was really important for
cloudherds to know how to do rescues, wasn't it?  And---

"Stop."  Her mother held up a hand, not noticing or just ignoring the looks on
the faces of the villagers who had overheard Noxy's torrent of words.  "You can
go.  But!" she continued, "But you ride with Grappa Gas and Granna Fee, and
that's all you do---ride.  Understood?"

Noxy nodded obediently.  "Yes, *amma*."  She had learned long ago not to keep
asking for a whole orange when she'd already talked her mother into a half.

Somehow everyone eventually realized that they agreed with Indy's decision or
that they were so outnumbered as to make further argument pointless.  After
that, it only took them a few minutes to gather what they needed.  Rockfalls and
avalanches were common in the mountains, and they had lifted more than one
tinker or trader out of a difficult spot.  Coils of hemp rope with spider-silk
cores hung ready in the long shed next to the cloud pen, and everyone kept a
warm goofskin cap and some heavy gloves handy just in case.

"You look ridiculous," Sensy told Rash flatly as he came down the wooden steps
to the mounting platform.  He had stitched what he claimed were eagle's wings
onto the side flaps of his cap.

Rash looked her up and down.  "Really?  Because I think you look amazing.
Excuse me."  He winked at Noxy and stepped around the speechless pair of
thirteen-year-olds.

"Was he---was he *flirting* with you?" Noxy demanded.

Sensy rolled her eyes.  "I really hope not."

"Ears all!" Aft called out two minutes later.  He had changed into heavy pants
and a padded coat and a pair of soft boots, and his hair was pulled back in a
thick club braid with a blue ribbon from his wife's wedding collar woven into it
for luck.  "You know how this is done.  I'll lead on Pillow with the younglings
as spotters and the Gifted as a guide."  He stabbed his finger at Rash and
Sensy.  "Gas and Fee, you've got Blue---you take Noxy with you.  In and out,
quick and simple, and everyone's back here for soup before you can sneeze.  No
adventures, right?"  He glared at Noxy, Sensy, and Rash until the three
teenagers mumbled, "No adventures."

"Right!"  He walked to the end of the plank that jutted out from the platform
and whistled through his fingers.  When nothing happened, he muttered something
about "soggy" and "lazy" and whistled again more loudly.

A hundred strides away and fifty strides below them, a foggy-edged blue-gray
mass rippled and began to pull itself into something dense enough to hold the
weight of a person.  The second, smaller blob next to it followed suit.  Side by
side, Big Blue and Pillow drifted toward the villagers and the lone tiger
waiting at the edge of the ravine.  A clanking noise further along the ravine
signalled that whoever Indy had sent to pull back the pen's spiderweb gate was
pedalling hard to pull it aside.

Big Blue scraped against the ravine wall.  Aft glanced over his shoulder, then
took three steps and dove off the end of the plank.

Noxy leaned over the railing and held her breath.  One, two, three... Big Blue
dimpled as the burly cloudherd tucked, flipped over, spread-eagled, and hit him
dead center.  Gray waves rippled out across the cloud's back as Aft rolled over
onto his knees and pressed his hands down firmly.  Noxy couldn't see his face,
but she knew his eyes would be closed in concentration as he mind-spoke to his
mount.

"Show off," Grappa Gas muttered beside her.

Granna Fee elbowed him.  "Gets it from his old man."

Something twinged in the back of Noxy's head.  She blinked.  "Did you say
something?" she asked Sensy.

"What?"  She and Rash were watching Aft just as intently as Noxy.

"Never mind."  Noxy shook her head.  "Look, he's coming up."

Big Blue rose toward the platform, bunching into an evern firmer mass as he
came.  Aft had risen to one knee, but kept one hand on the cloud's back so that
he could continue to mind-talk to it.  A silver-tipped scaw shot out of its
cliffside nest, cawing its displeasure at the sight of a human just a few
strides away.

Aft looked up and smiled the smile he only ever wore when he was on cloudback or
had his infant daughter in his arms.  With a whoop he ran across across Big
Blue's back and launched himself into the air again.

Rash whistled.  "Nice leap," he said appreciatively as Aft landed right in the
middle of Pillow.  "And blind, too."

"It's not such a trick," Noxy said dismissively, though she was secretly
impressed.  "He must have got Big Blue to tell him where she was."

"Sure, but would you trust a cloud's directions that much?"  Rash challenged
her.  "Most of the time I can't make cheese or cherries out of what they say."

Noxy shrugged.  She had realized early in their training that mind-speech was a
lot easier for her than it was for Sensy or Rash, or even for some of the olders
who were already riding.  She had stopped talking about it after a few muttered
accusations of showing off.  The only person she shared her progress with now
was her grandmother, and she didn't even tell Granna Fee everything.

Grappa Gas made everyone wait until Pillow was only a couple of strides below
the mounting platform before he let Sensy and Rash jump.  The teenagers had been
doing it since they were little children, but the brief moment of flight and
*poof!* as they landed still made them all whoop.

"Your turn," Grappa Gas said to Kulbinder.

The tiger's ears lay flat against his skull, and his tail whipped from side to
side.  Noxy was sure he was going to refuse, but with a sudden burst of speed he
charged to the end of the plank and flung himself into the air.  Grappa Gas,
Granna Fee, and Noxy leaned over the railing.

"Huh," Grappa Gas said.  "I guess they really do always land on their feet."

*Twinge.* Noxy winced and put her hand on the back of her head.  There it was
again, that feeling of, of---of something, but what?

Granna Fee noticed her expression.  "Are you all right?"

"Sure," Noxy lied.  One of the grownups' many rules about cloudherding was that
people shouldn't fly if they were sick, but she wasn't going to admit anything
that might mean being left behind.  "Come on, let's go."

Aft steered the cow out of the way so that Big Blue could take her place beneath
the plank.  Grappa Gas landed on him with a soft *thud*.  Granna Fee jumped a
moment later, and Noxy a moment after that.  "Oof," Granna Fee grunted, rolling
over and sitting up.  "That's not as soft as it used to be."  But then she
smiled like the girl she had once been and put her arm around Noxy so that her
granddaughter could lean against her the way she had so many times before.

Granna Fee pressed her hand against Big Blue and closed her eyes.  The cloud
turned obediently and began drifting toward the mouth of the gorge.

"I'll take lead," Aft called through cupped hands.

"Yes, you said," Granna Fee muttered under her breath.  She slowed Big Blue so
that Pillow could pass.  As she did so, Aft took the ox horn from his belt and
blew three loud notes, low high low.  Indy blew an answering note as the two
clouds passed through the gate and into the wide expanse of the pass.

Cloudherding is cold work, even in the summer.  In the spring, in the mountains,
when breath still fogs and the wind pokes its fingers through every loose seam
and down every collar, it's beyond freezing.  A hundred heartbeats after they
left the cloud pen, Granna Fee had wrapped a fleece around herself and her
granddaughter, leaving only their faces exposed.  Up ahead, Noxy saw that Rash
and Sensy had done the same---as Sensy said, he might be a goof, but at least he
was a *warm* goof.

Only Grappa Gas seemed unaffected.  "Saints and their inventions, but I miss
this," he sighed.  He'd brought a cushion to rest his wooden leg on so that it
wouldn't poke into Big Blue, but a long scarf was his only concession to the
freezing temperature.  "Look, the condors are back in their nest!  We should
invite them them to visit some time."

"They're not really the most sociable of creatures," Granna Fee said dryly.

Grappa Gas harrumphed.  "You just have to get to know them.  I wonder if any of
their chicks will be Gifted this year?  That would be a thing, wouldn't it?  Oh,
and down there, is that---saints, is that a person down there?"

"Where?"  Noxy pushed the heavy fleece aside and scrambled to the cloud's
leading edge.  "I don't see, where?"

Grappa Gas shook his head.  "Sorry, girl, it was just a troll."  He patted her
shoulder.

"Someone needs to remember to wear his glasses when he's out and about," Granna
Fee sniffed pointedly.  Grappa Gas harrumphed again, but didn't reply.

It had taken the tiger a day to hike up the pass to Stale Leftovers.  The
cloudherds covered the same distance in less than half an hour, even with the
headwind.  "There," Granna Fee said, pointing at a thin plume of smoke.

Grappa Gas frowned, then looked at Kulbinder.  "I thought you said there were
just a few of them."

"There are fewer than we started with," he growled.  He had spent most of the
flight crouched down to get out of the wind, his legs and tail tucked underneath
his body.  Now he stood, arched his back, and padded forward to join Granna Fee
at Big Blue's leading edge.

The soldiers' makeshift camp sat on a barren pinnacle of rock that rose like an
island out of the forest.  A dozen drab gray tents huddled around a small fire.
Shading her eyes with her hand, Noxy saw a handful of men moving about, some
propped against one another to stay upright.

Grappa Gas gave a low whistle.  "The *tralpa* isn't going to like this," he
said.

"Neither is my daughter," Granna Fee replied.

One of the soldiers spotted the clouds a moment later.  The cloudherds were too
far away to hear his shouts, but there was no mistaking the urgency in the way
he waved his arms, or the way his companions rousted their weakened and injured
comrades.

"Keep your eyes wide," Grappa Gas ordered Noxy curtly.  "Forest might be happy
to let us take them, or it might not."

It wasn't.  Without warning a hundred angry voices cawed behind them, and
suddenly they were in the midst of a flock of gray-shouldered mountain crows,
each one an angry feathered missle with sharp claws and a pecking beak.  Noxy
screamed as one grabbed her hair and another took hold of her collar and pecked
her shoulder.  She screamed again, swatting at them as Granna Fee and Grappa Gas
yelled and did the same.  She could *feel* their anger coursing through her own
veins.

The tiger's roar sent the birds wheeling into the air above them and hurtling
away.  Noxy slapped at her hair one last time, not quite believing that the
attack was over.

A faint shout from up ahead told her that it wasn't.  Aft spun the end of a coil
of rope over his head to keep them at bay while Sensy and Rash batted at any
bird that came too close.

The birds swirled around them for a dozen heartbeats before veering away.  Aft
handed the rope to Rash and knelt to press his hands against Pillow.  A moment
later he looked up and shook his head grimly.  The cow was too frightened to
land when the forest was this angry.  If anyone was going to rescue the
soldiers, it would have to be the foursome on Big Blue.

"Hold on!" Grappa Gas bellowed.  "It's going to get bumpy!"

---

They hardly said a word on the way back to Stale.  The young soldier even fell
asleep, snoring gently with his head on the tiger's flank.  The others watched
the mountains go by, too exhausted for more than an occasional flicker of
interest.

With her hand on Big Blue's back, Noxy could feel how unhappy the cloud was.  It
wasn't just that he was carrying strangers, or that those strangers were
bleeding and miserable.  When clouds died, they just spread out into nothing.
The thought that something could end but still be there---that it could go from
being alive to being like a rock or a log---made the canvas-wrapped corpses on
his back frightening in a way that storm winds and lightning would never be.

*Sh, sh, sh,* Noxy mind-spoke soothingly, stroking the cloud as if he was a
skittish newborn goof.  *Home soon, then rest.* At that moment, she wanted it
just as much as the cloud.

Grappa Gas brought Big Blue down amongst the stones in front of the village
gate.  Wearily, the soldiers up slid off the cloud to stand among the bright
green ferns of spring.  The waiting villagers came forward to offer them men
blankets and fleeces, then stepped back, unsure what to do next.

Indy didn't let them stand idle for long---she never did.  "Get everyone up into
the traders' hall," she ordered crisply.  "And get a couple of pots of stew
going---and some tea.  You do drink tea, don't you?" she asked the nearest soldier.

Rash and Sensy came up the trail from the cloud pen, where Aft had taken Pillow.
"Are you all right?" Sensy asked anxiously.

"I'm fine," Noxy said, thinking of how just a couple of years ago she and Sensy
and Rash would sit together under a single big blanket while Granna Fee told
ghost stories.  "The scariest part was the crows.  I've never seen the forest
that angry."

"I never want to again," Sensy said, shivering.

Rash nudged her shoulder with his.  "Where's the tiger gone?" he asked Noxy.

A terrified shout from inside the ancient walls was his answer.  A heartbeat
later the village *tralpa* stumbled through the gate, tripping over the hem of
his robe of office.  "There's--- there's a--- Reeve!  Reeve!  What is *that
creature* doing here?"

"Saints give me strength," Noxy's mother muttered.  She caught her daughter's
eye, sighed, and then put her second-best smile on and turned to face the king's
official representative to the village of Stale Leftovers.

Scholar Nangyal---he insisted that the villagers use the title, even though he
had not yet passed the examination---looked as though he had slept in his
clothes and only just woken up, and with good reason.  Like the soldiers who
straightened up when they caught sight of his official gray scarf, he had the
near-black skin of a lowlander.  But where they were lean, he sagged, and where
the soldier's had only a few days of stubble on their shaved heads, the frizzy
hair and failed beard of the king's representative in Stale Leftovers were as
unruly as the ferns he trampled as he strode over to Indy and glared at her.

"Reeve, are you aware that there is an *animal* in the village?" he demanded
icily.

"Yes, Scholar," she replied.  "His name is Kulbinder.  He arrived this morning."

"Well, why was I not informed?  And who are *these* people?" he continued,
jabbing a finger at the soldiers.  "You!  Sergeant!  Your uniform is a
disgrace.  What are you doing here?"

The soldier who had been the last to climb onto Big Blue nodded ruefully.  "It
isn't quite regimental standard, is it?" he acknowledged.  "Nothing a bar of
soap won't put right, though.  I'll see to it once my men are settled."

"Settled?"  The *tralpa* looked from the sergeant to his men and back to the
sergeant.  "Finally!  Honestly, no disrespect to His Grace of course, but this
is long overdue.  *Long* overdue," he repeated, nodding agreement with himself.

The sergeant cleared his throat.  "Actually, honored, the, um, the court didn't
send us."  He locked eyes with the *tralpa*.  A lump rose in Noxy's throat as
one of his men took a couple of paces to position himself behind Nangyal, his
hand ever-so-casually falling to the hilt of his sword.

The whole village held its breath.  One heartbeat, two...  "You're---you're
*rebels*!?" the *tralpa* spluttered.  "Here!?  Reeve!  Reeve!  Arrest these
men!"

"No." "No!" Indy and the sergeant said simultaneously.  They looked at each
other, momentarily startled.

The sergeant was the first to continue.  "Leave it," he ordered sharply.  Behind
the *tralpa*, the soldier slid his half-drawn sword back into its sheath.  The
sergeant turned to Indy.  "Honored?  If you don't want us here, we'll go, but we
won't suffer arrest, and I ask leave to---"

"Nobody's arresting anybody," she interrupted.  "Not right now, anyway.  No,
with respect, Scholar, I'm not done.  These men are travelers.  They're injured,
and we need to lay their dead to rest before they ghost.  Sergeant---I'm sorry,
I don't know your name?"

"I'm Dorbu, honored," the sergeant replied, dipping his head respectfully.

"Sergeant Dorbu," Indy continued in her this-is-how-it's-going-to-be voice, "Do
you promise that you and your men will do nothing rebellious while you're our
guests?"

"You have my word, honored," the sergeant said.

"And mine," Kulbinder rumbled.  Noxy jumped.  Somehow the tiger had slipped
through the village gate and padded over to the little gathering unnoticed while
everyone was talking.

The *tralpa* hastily backed up a few steps, tripping over the hem of his robe
once again.  "What?  No!  Reeve, I *order* you to arrest these men!  And this
creature!  They are *rebels*!  You can't trust them!"

"Hate to say it, but he has a point," Grappa Gas interjected.  He had been
stroking Big Blue's flank, mind-speaking to the old bull to calm him after all
the excitement.  "They've all broken at least one oath that we know of.  What's
to stop 'em breaking another?"

Instead of replying, Sergeant Dorbu unbuckled his sword belt and held it out to
Grappa Gas.  The old man blinked.  "What in the underhells am I supposed to do
with that thing?"

"I'm sure that won't be necessary," Indy interjected hastily, the look on her
face showing exactly what she thought of anyone giving Grappa Gas a sword to
play with.  "Let's all just..."  She took a deep breath.  "Let's just get these
men warmed up and fed and then we can do right by their dead and then it will be
time for dinner and then we can all get some sleep and sort this out in the
morning, all right?"

The *tralpa* drew himself up.  "That is *unacceptable*!" he spat.  "These men
are traitors to the kingdom!  You, Gas!"  He jabbed a finger at Grappa Gas.  "I
hereby appoint you acting reeve.  Arrest these men and then arrest *her*!"  He
swivelled his arm to point accusingly at Indy.

One heartbeat, two... Someone snickered.  Someone else muttered something, and
the people next to them smothered laughter.  Grappa Gas sucked in his cheeks,
but managed to keep a straight face.

Sergeant Dorbu glanced at Indy, then at the *tralpa*, and then very deliberately
buckled his sword back on.  "With your leave, honored?"  he said to Indy,
dipping his head once again.  Without waiting for an answer he bent over and
lifted one of the canvas bundles onto his shoulder.  "If there's somewhere we
could...?"

"I'll show you the way," Granna Fee said.

And just like that, somehow it was settled.  The *tralpa* stormed and raged for
a few moments longer, but once he realized that no one was paying much attention
he wrapped his robe and what was left of his dignity around himself and marched
back the house that the law required the villagers to keep up for him.

Noxy barely noticed the sound of him slamming the door.  Once the soldiers who
were fit enough had picked up their comrades' bodies, and the others had been
taken through the gate to have their injuries tended to, Grappa Gas had
announced that he was going to get Big Blue back to the cloud pen.  Rash and
Sensy had gone to find spare blankets for the soldiers, leaving Noxy by herself.
Feeling somehow lost, she went looking for something to do.

Her mother was still organizing people in the square.  Yes, the soldiers would
stay in the trading hall, she'd already said that.  Yes, the wounded---where
else would they go?  And yes, there *were* a lot more than 'a few' of them, but
there was nothing they could do about that now.

Indy caught sight of her daughter.  "There you are.  Can you please go home and
make some tea?  Use the big pot, and all the honey we have left.  I have the
feeling we're going to have lots of visitors..."

The water hadn't even boiled before Grappa Gas showed up.  He rapped on the door
with his knuckles and entered without waiting for a hello.  "Hey there.  Where's
your mother?"

"She should be back soon," Noxy said.  She added a handful of tea leaves to the
cinnamon bark and green cardamom pods already in the pot.  It was an
extravagance---the pack traders who brought such delicacies to the village
wouldn't start visiting until the last of the snow had melted, which was at
least another month away---but Granna Fee had always said that a good cup of tea
was worth a thousand words.

"Mind if I sit?" Grappa Gas settled himself on a stool that was at least as old
as he was and watched Noxy drizzle the last of the honey into the pot.

"What did you find out?" Noxy asked after a moment.

The old man snorted.  "Just like your mother, aren't you? And your granna, too.
Always thinking one step ahead of everyone else." He smiled.  "You know, if your
granna hadn't been so smart, I might've wound up being your grappa.  I remember
once when---"

"Grappa!" Noxy cut him off, exasperated and amused at the same time.  "Tell me
what the soldiers said!"

"And how do you know they said anything?" Grappa Gas challenged her.

"Because they're a long way from home, and tired, and sore, and want us all to
like them," Indy answered, closing the front door behind her as she came in.
"And because I saw you duck into the trading hall.  Now, what did you find out?"
She kissed the old man on his grizzled cheek and sat on the other stool.

For a moment all Grappa Gas could think of was how alike mother and daughter
were.  Noxy's hair might be brown and wavy like her father's instead of straight
and black like her mother's, and her face more square than round, but they had
the same quick minds.  When Indy had turned ten, he had predicted that she would
be reeve before she was thirty.  *Better start telling everyone that Noxy's
going to take the job too,* he thought.

"The king's men hit the rebels while they were crossing the ford near Tastes
Like Duck Droppings," he told Indy.  "Just bad luck, but they were split between
the two sides of the river when they were attacked."  His face darkened.
"Fellow I spoke doesn't expect he'll see many of his friends again."

Indy glanced at Noxy.  "This doesn't go out of this house," she warned.  Noxy
nodded, turning to the stove as the lid on the kettle began to whistle.  She
lifted it carefully with a pair of sticks to pour the boiling water into the
tea, then replaced it on the stove and set the teapot on the table to steep.

"Was there anything else?" Indy asked.

Grappa Gas shook his head.  "Not really.  Fellow, didn't want to say it, but it
sounds like King Denpa's winning.  And about time, too---he's got help now from
half his neighbors, all worried that Shudarga's craziness might be contagious.
If you ask me---"

The front door banged open.  Aft strode in and glared at Indy.  "How soon are
they leaving?" he demanded.

"Well, good day to you too," Grappa Gas muttered.

Aft ignored his father.  "How soon, Indy? You know you can't let them stay."

Indy stood up.  "Make yourself comfortable," she said, gesturing at her stool.
"Noxy, go get the peeling stool from out back.  Brush it off before you bring it
in the house."

Aft glowered at Indy a moment longer, then sat down opposite his father.  The
short stool creaked in protest under his weight.  Noxy set down the peeling
stool she had fetched for her mother, then began pouring tea as inconspicuously
as she could while Aft counted off the reasons the rebels couldn't stay.  What
if the king sent an army after them? Wait, what did he mean "if", of course he
would.  There were only three hundred people in Stale, and only half a dozen of
them had ever held a sword.  Not that they *had* any swords.  And even if they
had---

"I'm surprised to hear you say all this," Indy interrupted.  "I thought if
anyone would take their side, it would be you."

"Well, yes, of course I do," Aft blustered.  "The sooner leeches like the
*tralpa* have to start earning an honest living like the rest of us, the better.
But---"

"But it's different when someone's actually on your doorstep, isn't it?"  Grappa
Gas needled.

Aft clenched his hands into fists.  "Of course it's different.  If the king's
men come looking for this lot---"

"Enough!"  Indy slapped the table with her hand.  "Enough, both of you.  We have
a stormload of trouble to fly through, and I will *not* have you two making it
worse with your bickering."

Noxy set a steaming mug of tea in front of her and two others in front of Grappa
Gas and his son.  Indy stared into hers as if hoping the tiny swirling leaves
might spell out some answers.  "I know it's a big thing," she went on quietly.
"And I did think about turning them away, but look at them.  They look like
they've been through the Blight.  If a storm caught them in the pass, they
wouldn't even make it as far as Rancid.  How would that make us look?"

Grappas Gas scowled.  "What people think won't matter much if we've all had our
throats cut.  No, wait, hear me out."  He slurped his tea and set the cup down
with a clatter.  "Saving travelers who got caught on the mountain, well, we can
explain that if we have to, and damn the *tralpa*.  But letting them stay
here---saints and all their gifts, Indy, we can't.  We just can't."

Aft snorted.  "Hate to say it, but for once I agree with you.  And what about
the tiger?  What are we supposed to feed it?  Or should I ask 'who'?"

"Disgusting Aftertaste!" Indy snapped.  "I will *not* have that kind of talk
about one of the Gifted.  Especially not in front of my daughter."

"Just saying," Aft muttered.  "Anyway, I should probably get home."  He
swallowed the rest of his tea in one gulp, stood, and nodded a curt goodbye.

"Maybe it wouldn't be such a bad thing if you were right!" Grappa Gas called
out.  "Maybe we'd have some peace and quiet around here if a few of us *did* get
eaten!"  He turned back to Indy.  "Don't worry about him.  He's just worried.
First time and all that."

"I remember," Indy smiled.  With their first baby due in just a few weeks, Aft
and his wife had stayed behind when the other adults left for the mountains to
gather the village's herd.  The double weight of becoming a father for the first
time and not being up in his element had made him as fidgety as a young camel in
springtime.

Grappa Gas drained the last of his own tea.  "It's good," he told Noxy
appreciatively.  "Maybe wants more cinnamon next time, though."

"I'll try to remember," Noxy promised.

Indy stood when Grappa Gas did.  "Will you stay for dinner?"

He shook his head.  "Thanks, girl, but I promised your mother I'd help her, um,
peel some potatoes."  He winked, ignoring Noxy's little 'eww' of disgust.  Indy
smiled and kissed him on the cheek again.  He was humming as he stumped out the
door.

Noxy waited until her mother said down again before saying, "*Amma*...?"

"Yes, sweetling?"

Noxy hesitated.  She didn't know where to start.  "Do you think the king really
is going to come looking for them?"

Indy laughed wearily.  "Probbly not the king himself.  But don't worry---they
won't be here long enough for us to have to worry about that."

When the Learned Shudarga had marched on the capital the previous summer, Grappa
Gas had demanded that the cloudherds do their best to drown her troops.  Aft had
argued just as loudly that they should support the rebellion.  After all, what
had the king's *tralpa* done for them except take a quarter of what they brought
home at the end of every summer and tell them they couldn't build a bigger
fishpond?  As the arguments grew more heated, Indy had put on her reeve's scarf,
called everyone together, and laid down the law.  This was the lowlanders'
fight.  The people of Stale Leftovers were *not* going to take either side, not
while she was reeve, and if anyone didn't like it, they could have an election
right then and there to sort it out.  Anyone?  No?  All right, then, why didn't
everyone get back to their chores, because they weren't going to do themselves.

Mother and daughter sat in silence for a moment.  Finally Indy stretched.  "So
tell me, did you collect any spiderwebs, or did you and Sensy spend the whole
day mooning after Rash?"

"*Amma*! And how can you think about spiderwebs on a day like this?  And anyway,
Sensy's the one who's mooning after Rash and his stupid moustache.  *I* think
it's dumb."

"If you say so."  Indy raised her arms and stretched.  "Now, what are we---"

*Crash!* They jumped as something landed on the roof above their heads, sending
tiles skittering down to shatter on the cobblestones outside.  A menacing yowl
sent ice up Noxy's spine.

"What in the names...?"  Indy crossed the floor in three steps and threw open
the door just in time to see a troll land in the narrow street in front of their
house.  She yelped and flung herself to the side as the hairy creature lunged
past her and raced up the stairs on all fours.

The tiger hit the cobblestones a heartbeat later.  "Which way did it go?" he
demanded, his ears back and his tail lashing.

The sound of a window shutter being flung open upstairs answered his question
before Indy could.  "Wait, stop!"  She blocked the tiger's way.  "What in the
saints' names are you *doing*?"

"He was spying on us!" the tiger snarled.  "Now let me pass!"

"No!" The mayor of Stale glared at the cat, her eyes flashing.  "This is *our*
village, and you will *not* race around like a madman---a mad anything---unless
*I* say so, is that clear?"

It was the bravest thing Noxy had ever seen her mother do, and for one long
moment, she was sure it would be the last.  The muscles in the tiger's shoulders
bunched.  He braced his legs to charge---and then, just as suddenly, relaxed.

"As you say," he growled, his tail still twitching.  "But I still want to know
who that damn chimpanzee was spying for."

"We call them 'trolls' here," Indy said, her voice still full of steel.
"They're our neighbors.  And I imagine he was doing what any neighbor would do
if a bunch of strangers showed up next door---having a look to see what's going
on."

"There were some trolls up by the spiderweb orchard this morning," Noxy said,
immediately wishing she hadn't when two heads turned to stare at her.  "They
stopped Sensy and me when we were coming back down."

"How come you didn't tell me?" her mother demanded.

"It's been kind of busy!" Noxy said defensively.  "Anyway, they were all bigger
than this one.  I think," she amended.

The tiger sat on his haunches.  "Is this normal here?  Chimp---*trolls* coming
this close to a human settlement?  Because they very much keep to themselves in
Thind."

"No, it's not normal," Indy said.  She waved at the table.  "But if we're going
to talk about it, would you like to come in?"

The tiger regarded her coolly for a moment, then blinked and looked away.
"Thank you, honored.  Perhaps some other time.  I should see if the sergeant
needs me."  And without any more goodbye than that, he rose and loped away.

Noxy let out her breath in a long whoosh.  "Well," she said shakily.  "That
wasn't scary at all."

Her mother sat back down on her stool and squeezed her daughter's hand.  "Hardly
at all," she agreed.  "Are you all right?"

Noxy nodded.  "Sure," she lied.

Indy squeezed her hand again, then got up to close the door.  "Good.  Let's
scramble some eggs and call it a day."  She took down their one frying pan and
set it on the stove beside the kettle.  "Tomorrow, I'm going to see if I can get
to know the sergeant a little better.  And I think you ought to get to know the
tiger's boy.  Let's see if we can find out if they have any other surprises
tucked away."
