<!-- 2017-01-16 -->
## Prolog

*Consider Cherne.  A diamond adrift in the heavens, its single
continent is surrounded on all sides by a great ocean whose outer
shore, the Worldrim, rises up to hold that sweet speck of life as a
child might cup a drop of water in her hand.*

*Cherne's history began with the Pilots, and nearly ended with them as
well.  Powerful and inhuman, their reign ended in a century-long
Mutiny that scarred the moon, turned Lake Karaband into a sea of
glass, and littered the land with strange magic.  When it was over the
Pilots were gone, leaving the world to carry on as best it could.*

*Now look there, where the Brumoso Mountains rise above the endless
squabbles of the Ninety-Nine Kingdoms.  A girl is doing her chores.
No longer a child but not yet an adult, she has no idea that her world
is about to change forever...*

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 1: Soldiers

Noxy was collecting spiderwebs when the soldiers came to Stale.
Winter had turned to spring, and the sun shone diamond-bright in a
clear blue sky, but stubborn crusts of snow still lurked between the
twisted mountain pines.

"Shoo."  She poked a fat brown squirrel spider with a stick.  It waved
its hairy forelegs at her indignantly before scuttling away.  Noxy cut
the anchor threads of its with two practiced twists of her knife and
began winding it onto a stick.

"Do you think I should put new buttons on my coat?" Sensy asked,
pulling a branch aside to see if another web lay beneath it.

Noxy glanced at her.  "Why? Are those ones coming loose?"

Sensy looked down at her soft brown yakskin coat critically.  "No.
They're just kind of plain."  She sighed wistfully.  "Granna Fee has
some really nice red ones.  She said she'd give them to me if I weeded
her pepper garden."

"Her whole garden?"  Noxy shook the dew off the spider's web and
stuffed it into the loosely-woven bag slung over her shoulder.
"That's a lot of work for some buttons you don't really need."

"Oh, you're no help," Sensy pouted.  She had spent the winter
embroidering red and green patterns on her jacket's cuffs and collar.
All she seemed to want to talk about any more was her clothes and her
hair and the boys she and Noxy might meet that summer, who couldn't
possibly be as boring as the ones in Stale.  Especially
Rash---practically *anyone* would be more fun to be around than Rash.

"A lot of girls are like that when they get their changes," Granna Fee
had said when Noxy had complained about the flighty stranger who
seemed to have taken her best friend's place.

"Not me!" Noxy had declared.

Granna Fee had laughed and ruffled her granddaughter's hair.  "No,
daffodil, not you."

Noxy was reaching for another web when a high-pitched voice shouted,
"Soldiers! Soldiers!"

"Oh, great," she sighed, rolling her eyes at Sensy.  The whole point
of going out to collect spiderwebs that morning had been to get *away*
from the younger children for a few hours.

Young Gas crashed through a bush and tripped over a root, then picked
himself up and ran to the two girls.  "There's soldiers in the
village!" he said breathlessly, tugging at Noxy's sleeve.  "And
they've been fighting!  And there's a *tiger* with them!"

"Sure," Noxy said wearily, pulling her arm away.  "And there's a
dragon under your bed."  The pass below Stale were still blanketed in
snow.  Avalanches happened almost every day---someone would have to be
foolish *and* desperate to be on the road this early in the spring.

"But there *are*!" Young Gas protested, hopping from one foot to
another with excitement.  "They've got swords, and some of them are
bleeding!  And the tiger can *talk*!"

Noxy opened her mouth to say, "Why don't you go jump in the fishpond?"
but a deep *doom doom* cut her off.  She and Sensy looked at each
other wide-eyed.  *Doom doom*, pause.  *Doom doom*, pause.  It was
Stale's home drum.  It meant a house was on fire, or a bear had
wandered into the village, or someone was lost in a storm and needed
help to find their way home.  It meant trouble.

Noxy hung her bag on a nearby branch.  "Come on!" she told Sensy,
setting off at a run.

"I told you!" Young Gas shouted behind them. "I told you there
was---hey, wait for me!"

Patches of ice made the path slippery underfoot, but Noxy didn't slow
down until she reached the ridge overlooking the village.  There, in a
clearing left by a long-ago lighting strike, she paused to catch her
breath.

The ancient walls of the fortress of Stale lay below her.  Rain and
snow had rounded the edges off the Pilots' stonework, making it look
like a snow fort that was just starting to melt, but it was still as
solid as the mountains themselves.

The village's two-story wooden houses sheltered inside the walls like
ducklings in a nest.  Thin wisps of smoke rose from their slate
chimneys, while vegetable plots and racks of drying spiderwebs filled
the spaces between them.

To the west, the wall dropped straight into a steep-sided gorge.  A
net woven from squirrel spiders' webs was stretched over its top, as
light as a dream but as strong as steel.  Another net hung down at the
gorge's mouth to make a gate.  Inside, just visible from the ridge,
two gray clouds drifted half-asleep.

Noxy had spent every moment she could that winter watching the clouds,
riding them, and, most importantly, learning how to mind-talk to them.
Grownups called the pair slow and lazy, but they were the most
exciting things in Noxy's world---except, of course, for the herd of
half-wild clouds grazing on the mountain peaks in the distance.

Noxy was about to set off again when Sensy grabbed her hand.  "Wait!"
she hissed, pointing into the trees.  For a moment all Noxy saw was
branches.  Then a pair of brown eyes blinked, and suddenly she could
make out a hairy form in the trees.

Noxy's mouth went dry.  She felt Sensy squeezed her hand, and squeezed
back.  As long as they didn't startle it...

Little Gas burst out of the bushes behind them and ran headlong into
Noxy.  "Oof!" he exclaimed, "What are you---mmph!"

"Sh!" Noxy whispered urgently, her hand clamped over his mouth.
"Don't... move..."

Before Young Gas could protest, the troll stepped into the clearing.
His fur was silvered with age, and his eyes seemed as old as the
mountains themselves.  He and Noxy stared at each other for one long
moment before he leaped for the nearest branch and swung himself up
into the tree.  After one last look, he disappeared into the greenery.

Sensy was the first to speak.  "Wh-what's a troll doing *here*?" she
asked shakily, still holding Noxy's hand.

Noxy shook her head.  "Worry about that later.  Come on!"

The drum had stopped booming by the time the children reached the
fortress wall.  An enormous stone door stood half-open at the
entrance, its iron hinges melted in some long-ago battle.  The wooden
gate that Stale's current human inhabitants had built to fill the gap
was made of whole tree trunks, but still looked like a child's toy
next to the Pilots' ancient work.

Inside, it seemed like the whole village was standing in the main
square---or rather, the whole village minus most of the adults, who
had left a week ago to collect Stale's clouds from their wintering
grounds in the high peaks.  Three hundred people were there, from
babies in their mothers' arms to Grappa Gas with his cane, all in an
uncertain muttering half-circle.

A dozen soldiers stood at attention in front of them.  Each one had a
battle mask painted with fierce swirls of red and black pushed up on
top of his head.  Leather armor, as thick as bootsoles and studded
with metal, protected their bodies, while heavy wool kilts reached
from their waists to their knees.  Some had swords in scabbards on
their hips, while others had bows or spears, but each had a heavy pack
on his back.

And Young Gas had been right: they had been fighting.  One man's hand
was wrapped in a bloody bandage, while another's arm was in a sling.
None of them had washed or shaved in days, and from their haggard
faces, it didn't look like they had slept much either.

But Noxy didn't see any of that right away.  What she saw instead was
the tiger.  His stripes were dark brown on tan, not black on orange
like the picture in the story book that three generations of village
children had passed from hand to hand.  A pair of golden earrings hung
from his left ear, and his tail twitched now and again as if the
villagers' murmurs reminded him that he had not yet eaten lunch.

A boy stood beside him, armored like the soldiers and carrying a pack
as large as any of theirs.  Four half-healed scars ran across his
cheek, glistening redly against his near-black skin.  His back was
straight, but he was trembling, though whether it was from cold,
weariness, or fear, Noxy couldn't tell.

Sensy tugged at Noxy's sleeve.  "Who *are* they?"

"Sh!" Noxy whispered back, not willing to admit that she didn't know.
"I'm trying to hear!"

Noxy's mother Indy nodded at the soldier she had been speaking to and
stepped up onto the speaker's stone that lay in the center of the
square.  "Friends," she said in what Noxy thought of as her official
voice, "Friends, please.  I know it is early in the year for
travellers, but please greet Sergeant Dorbu and the Gifted Kulbinder."

The soldier she had been speaking to bowed to the villagers.  The
tiger merely blinked.  "They and their companions will be our guests
for the next little while," Indy continued.  "I trust you will all
make them welcome."

"How long's a little while?" Grappa Gas asked loudly.  Noxy saw her
mother wince.  Everyone loved Grappa Gas---or nearly everyone---but as
Granna Fee said, sometimes he had the manners of a constipated yak.

"Until they are ready to travel again," Indy reassured him.  Her eyes
swept across the crowd.  "Their journey has been a hard one---they
hoped to get through to Chaghan, but the forest had other plans.
Sergeant?  Would you like to say a few words?"

The sergeant bowed again and stepped up onto the speaker's stone as
Indy stepped down.  Like his men, his skin was black compared to the
villagers' brown, and his head was fuzzy with wiry stubble.  The two
yellow ribbons around his sleeve were the only sign of his rank.

Before he could open his mouth, Grappa Gas asked, "So, are you lot
loyalists or rebels?"

"I'm sure he'll tell us if you give him a chance to speak!"  Heads
turned as a burly man, all shoulders and scowl, pushed to the front of
the crowd.

"Uh oh," Noxy said under her breath.  Grappa Gas's son Aft was the
best cloudherd in Stale, at least in his own estimation.  After one
too many arguments over plans for the summer cloud drive, Indy had
ordered him to stay behind and mend equipment instead of going with
the other adults.  Grappa Gas had happily taken the mayor's side, and
father and son had been squabbling non-stop ever since.

"Um, thank you, honored," the soldier said.  "And thank you, people of
Stale.  As your mayor said, my comrades and I were trying to see if
the pass was clear so that we could carry news to Chaghan.  We---" He
paused, and for a moment Noxy could see how exhausted he was.  "There
was an avalanche.  Three days ago.  It drove those of us who survived
off the road into the forest.  Everything seemed all right at first,
but then the forest took offence and..."  He shrugged.  "Well, you can
guess what happened next."

The villagers murmured.  The Herd of Trees covered the Brumoso
Mountains from Uws in the south to Garheim's frigid shores in the
north.  It didn't hate humans the way the Jungle of Thind did, but it
guarded its territory as jealously as a mother bear guarded her cubs.
Gifted creatures that wanted to live in the forest did so on
sufferance, while humans were not welcome at all, not unless they
stuck to the handful of roads built long ago by the Pilots.
Travellers who strayed off them were rarely given warnings, and
*never* given second chances.

A cold breeze whipped the sergeant's words across the square as he
continued.  "We finally made it back to the road, but the worst of our
wounded couldn't go any further, so we left them in camp with a few of
the able-bodied and came here for help."  All traces of his earlier
smile were gone.  "That was the day before last.  I pray they're still
all right, but if they are, they won't be for much longer."

Grappa Gas broke the silence that followed.  "So which side *are* you
on?" he asked, his voice still loud but a notch less rude.

"I have the privilege of serving Respected Shudarga in this matter,"
Sergeant Dorbu answered calmly.

A handful of elders gasped at the rebel leader's name, but Aft crossed
his arms and nodded approvingly.  "Good for you!" he said firmly, his
glare daring his father to disagree.

Grappa Gas thumped his wooden leg loudly on the cobblestones.  "Good
for them, maybe, but what about us?  If the king's men come looking
for you, these walls won't keep them out for long."

"Quiet, both of you!" Indy said sharply.  She was a head shorter than
either of the men, but the iron in her voice left no room for
argument.  She nodded at the sergeant.  "Please, go ahead."

The sergeants shook his head.  "We didn't choose Stale for its walls,
honored.  We didn't really choose it at all.  We just washed up here
because we need help.  If you're afraid that'll bring trouble, we'll
understand if you send us on our way."

"Nobody is sending anyone away," Indy said firmly.  "We may not have
as much as some, but we take pride in our hospitality.  I'm sure we
can find some spare blankets to keep you warm and something better
than hardtack to feed you for as long as you need to stay."

"Thank you, honored," the sergeant said.  "But what we really want is
a couple of clouds so that we can go and rescue our friends."

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 2: Not Quite What We Were Expecting

The next five minutes were chaos.  Out of the question, Grappa Gas
said, whacking his wooden leg with his cane for emphasis.  The king's
law might overlook them giving shelter to a bunch of strays who
wandered in out of the cold, but flying off to rescue their friends?
Why, when the *tralpa* came back---

---they'd show him the gate and send him on his way, Aft cut in, arms
crossed and brows knotted.  The lazy good-for-nothing had run for the
capital the moment word of the rebellion had reached the mountains,
and hadn't been seen since.  As far as Aft was concerned, he'd given
up any right he ever had to tell people what the law was or wasn't.
And anyway, if they were going to shelter rebels, it wouldn't matter
if they'd come to Stale or Stale had gone to them.  And anyway again,
what would folk in other villages say if they heard that Stalers had
left men in the forest to die?  Saints, what would their own folk say
when they got back?

The argument swirled and churned across the cobblestones.  Little
whirlpools of disagreement came together, spun about, and flew apart
as people disagreed with their neighbors, or turned around to agree
with something they had overheard and were sucked into yet another
"what if?"

"This is going to go on forever," Noxy sighed.  She and Sensy had
stayed aloof on the sidelines, old enough to want to be part of the
grownup discussion, but young enough that the whole thing seemed
vaguely ridiculous.

"It's so stupid," Sensy agreed.  "I mean, they're all going to wind up
doing whatever your mother wants them to."

"Unless they get eaten by a *tiger*!"  The two girls shrieked and
jumped as sharp fingers poked them in the ribs.

"Rash!  Don't!"  Sensy punched the smirking boy in the arm.  "I *hate*
it when you sneak up on me!"

"I know," Rash smirked, running a thumb over the lip fuzz he insisted
on calling a mustache.  It had become a habit over the winter, one
that Noxy had told him countless times he ought to break before
*someone* broke his stupid finger.  "But it's better than being eaten,
isn't it?"

"The tiger's not going to eat anyone, you big yak," Noxy said as
scornfully as she could, her heart still racing.

"How do you know?  He looks awfully hungry to me."  Rash licked his
lips and growled.  "Mmm... tasty, tasty human."

"Stop it," Sensy said, punching his arm again.  "I mean it."

"Ow."  Rash rubbed his arm, looking genuinely surprised at the force
of Sensy's blow.  "I'm just kidding."

"Well, it's not funny," Sensy grumbled, hugging herself.  Stale's
walls sheltered the square from the mountain winds, but the air was
still cold.

"Anyway," Rash said, not quite rolling his eyes, "What I want to know
is, do we get to go on this rescue mission, or are we going to be
stuck here with the littles again."

"Of course we'll get to go!" Noxy exclaimed.

"Really?"  Rash ran his thumb over his mustache again.  "Then why
isn't anyone ordering us around?"

Noxy opened her mouth, closed it, then grunted, "Wait here."

She strode toward the center of the square where her mother was
speaking with the sergeant.  The tiger sat impassively on his haunches
next to them, twitching his tail at every sudden sound.  The boy with
the scarred face stood beside him.  His face was beyond exhausted, but
when his shoulders started to droop, the tiger growled quietly and he
snapped to attention again.

Noxy's mother caught sight of her.  "Oh, and this is my daughter,
Probably Noxious."

"Honored Noxious."  The sergeant bowed slightly.

Noxy hesitated, wondering if she was supposed to bow back, and was
immediately annoyed at herself.  Cloudherds didn't bow---that was a
silly lowlander custom.  "Just call me Noxy," she told him.  "*Amma*,
which cloud do you want me and Sensy and Rash on?  We can go and start
getting them ready while everyone's jawing."

Indy gave her daughter a look that Noxy knew all too well.  "Who said
anything about you three going?"

But Noxy knew her mother almost as well as her mother knew her, and
had already assembled her arguments.  They were definitely old
enough---why, they were all going to be riding *real* clouds in a few
weeks, not just tame old pair floating about in the cloud pen.  And
they wouldn't be going far, just a few gallops down the pass, and it
was really important for cloudherds to know how to do rescues, wasn't
it?  And---

"Stop."  Her mother held up a hand.  "You can go.  But!" she
continued, "But you ride with Grappa Gas and Granna Fee, and that's
all you do---ride.  Understood?"

Noxy nodded obediently.  "Yes, *amma*."  She turned to go, trying and
failing to keep a smug grin off her face.  Behind her, she heard her
mother sigh and Sergeant Dorbu say, "My men do that to me all the
time."

FIXME

It only took the villagers a few minutes to gather what they needed.
Rockfalls and avalanches were common in the mountains, and more than
one tinker or trader had needed to be lifted out of a difficult spot
after running into a bear or being set upon by trolls.  Coils of hemp
rope with spider-silk cores hung ready in the long shed next to the
cloud pen, and everyone kept an extra yakskin cap somewhere handy,
just in case.

"You look ridiculous," Sensy told Rash flatly as he came down the
wooden steps to the mounting platform.  He had been learning to
embroider during that winter's enforced idleness, and had stitched
what he claimed were eagle's wings onto the side flaps of his cap.

Rash looked her up and down.  "Really?  Because I think you look
amazing.  Excuse me."  He winked at Noxy and stepped around the
speechless 13-year-old to take his place on the platform.

"Ears all!" Aft called out, clapping his hands.  Despite the cold, he
was only wearing a sleeveless yakskin vest, knee-length wool shorts,
and a sturdy pair of boots.  His hair was pulled back in a thick club
braid, a blue ribbon from his wife's wedding collar woven into it for
luck.  "You know how this is done.  I'm fore on Big Blue, Gas and Fee
will have Pillow for spotter.  We'll down, lift, and out, quick and
simple, and get our new friends back here for soup before you can
sneeze.  No adventures, right?"  He turned a steely glare toward Noxy,
Sensy, and Rash, who nodded and mumbled, "No adventures."

"Right!"  And without anything more than that he walked out to the end
of the plank that stuck out three strides from the platform, looked
down to check that Big Blue was below him, and jumped.

Noxy leaned over the railing and held her breath.  One, two,
three... Big Blue dimpled under Aft's weight as the burly cloudherd
hit him dead center.  Gray waves rippled out across the cloud's back
as Aft rolled over onto his knees and pressed his hands down firmly.
Noxy couldn't see his face, but she knew his eyes would be closed in
concentration as he mind-spoke to his mount, rousing it from its
winter half-sleep.

Something twinged in the back of her head.  She blinked, momentarily
disoriented.  "Did you say something?" she asked Sensy.

"What?"  She and Rash were watching Aft just as intently as Noxy.

"I said---never mind."  Noxy shook her head.  "Look, he's coming up."

Big Blue rose slowly toward the platform, bunching up into a firmer
mass as he came.  Aft had risen to one knee, but kept one hand on the
cloud's back so that he could continue to mind-talk to it.  A
silver-tipped scaw shot out of its cliffside nest, cawing its
displeasure at the sight of a human just a few strides away.

Aft looked up and smiled the smile he only ever wore when he was on
cloudback or had his arm around his wife.  "You want me to get Pillow
for you?" he called up to his father.

"No need, I can---damn that boy!"  Grappa Gas harrumphed as Aft took
three long steps across Big Blue's back and launched himself into the
air again.

Rash whistled.  "Nice leap," he said appreciatively as Aft landed
right in the middle of Pillow.  "And blind, too."

"It's not such a trick," Noxy said dismissively, though she was
secretly impressed.  "He must have got Big Blue to tell him where she
was."

"Sure, but would you trust a cloud's directions that much?"  Rash
challenged her.  "Most of the time I can't make cheese or cherries out
of what they say."

Noxy shrugged.  She had realized early in their training that
mind-talking was a lot easier for her than it was for Sensy or Rash,
or even for some of the olders who were already riding.  She had
stopped talking about it after a few muttered accusations of showing
off.  The only person she shared her progress with now was Granna Fee,
and even she didn't---

*Twinge.* She winced and put her hand on the back of her head.  There
it was again, that feeling of, of---of something, but what?

This time Sensy noticed.  "Are you all right?"

"Sure," Noxy lied.  One of the few things Aft and Grappa Gas agreed on
was that cloudherds shouldn't fly if they were sick, but she wasn't
going to admit anything that might mean being left behind.  "Come on,
let's go."

Grappa Gas made everyone wait until Big Blue was only a couple of
strides below the mounting platform before he let them jump on.  The
three teenagers had been doing it since they were little children, but
the brief moment of flight and *poof!* as they landed still made them
all whoop.  Grappa Gas landed beside them a moment later, and Granna
Fee a moment after that.  "Oof," she grunted, rolling over and sitting
up.  "That's not as soft as it used to be."  But then she smiled like
the girl she had once been and put her arm around Noxy so that her
granddaughter could lean against her the way she had so many times
before.

Behind them, Rash nudged Sensy with his elbow.  "You can lean on me if
you get cold, you know."

Sensy sniffed.  "I don't expect I'll ever get *that* cold."

Granna Fee pressed her hand against Big Blue and closed her eyes.  The
cloud turned obediently and began drifting toward the spiderweb gate
that hung down over mouth of the gorge.  As he moved away from the
platform, Pillow rose to take his place.  Two of Stale's other
oldsters clambered aboard, too stiff or serious to jump.

"I'll take lead," Aft called.

"Yes, I heard you the first time," Granna Fee muttered under her
breath.  She slowed Big Blue so that Pillow could pass.  As she did
so, Aft took the ox horn from his belt and blew three loud notes, low
high low.

Indy blew an answering note from her seat above the cloud pen gate.
"Now comes the hard part," she told Sergeant Dorbu.  He, the tiger,
and the tiger's boy had come with her to see off the rescue party.
Instead of taking them with the others, she had led them up a steep
flight of stairs cut into the rock to a smaller square platform, where
she had seated herself on a sturdy little stool supported by a single
post.  As the clouds approached the gate, she put her feet on the
pedals that stuck out of the post and began pumping.

With a long squeak of protest, the spiderweb gate drew back so that
the clouds could get by.  "Saves us having to re-frib the curtain
every time someone comes in or out," she puffed.  "And it's half the
time."  She paused to wave Pillow and Big Blue's riders as they
drifted out of the pen and turned upwind.

"But twice the work, I'm guessing," Sergeant Dorbu said
sympathetically.  "Want me to wind it back?"

"What?  Oh, no, that's all right."  Indy started pedalling again.
"The exercise keeps me fit."

"Mm," the sergeant said, eyeing her.  When the tiger rumbled deep in
his throat, Sergeant Dorbu put on his most innocent expression.  The
tiger's boy just rolled his eyes.

Cloudherding is cold work, even in the summer.  In the spring, in the
mountains, when breath still fogs and the wind pokes its fingers
through every loose seam and down every collar, it's beyond freezing.
A hundred heartbeats after they left the cloud pen, Granna Fee had
wrapped a fleece around herself and her granddaughter, leaving only
their faces exposed.  Rash and Sensy had done the same---as Sensy
said, he might be a yak, but at least he was a *warm* yak.

Only Grappa Gas seemed unaffected.  "Saints and their inventions, but
I miss this," he sighed.  He'd brought a cushion to rest his wooden
leg on so that it wouldn't poke into Big Blue, but was dressed in the
same long coat and scarf that he had been wearing when the soldiers
arrived.  "Look, the condors are back in their nest!  We should invite
them them to visit some time."

"They're not really the most sociable of creatures," Granna Fee said
dryly.

Grappa Gas harrumphed.  "You just have to get to know them.  I wonder
if any of their chicks will be Gifted this year?  That would be a
thing, wouldn't it?  Oh, and down there, is that---saints, is that a
person down there?"

"Where?"  Noxy pushed the heavy fleece aside and scrambled to the
cloud's leading edge.  "I don't see, where?"

Grappa Gas shook his head.  "Sorry, girl, it was just a troll."  He
patted her shoulder.

"Someone needs to remember to wear his glasses when he's out and
about," Granna Fee sniffed pointedly.  Grappa Gas harrumphed again,
but didn't reply.

It had taken Sergeant Dorbu and his men a day to hike up the pass to
Stale Leftovers.  The Staler cloudherds covered the same distance in
less than half an hour, even with the headwind.  "There," Granna Fee
said, pointing at a thin plume of smoke.

Grappa Gas frowned.  "I thought he said there were just a few of
them."

Granna Fee frowned too.  "Maybe 'a few' means something different to
lowlanders."

The soldiers' makeshift camp sat on a barren pinnacle of rock that
rose like an island out of the forest.  Two dozen drab gray tents
huddled around a small fire.  Shading her eyes with her hand, Noxy saw
a handful of men moving about, some propped against one another to
stay upright.

Grappa Gas gave a low whistle.  "Aft's not going to like this," he
said.

"Neither is my daughter," Granna Fee replied, shaking her head.

One of the injured soldiers spotted the clouds a few minutes later.
The cloudherds were too far away to hear his shouts, but there was no
mistaking the urgency in the way he waved his arms.  Other soldiers
crawled out of their tents and began waving and shouting as well as
Aft steered Pillow in a long arc to the upwind side of the rocky
outcrop.  After a brief discussion that mostly consisted of
interrupting each other, Granna Fee and Grappa Gas had Big Blue hover
directly above the camp.

"You lot keep your eyes wide," Grappa Gas ordered the teenagers
curtly.  "Forest might be happy to have us take them, or it might
not."

Pillow descended until she bumped against the northern edge of the
rock, her upper side level with its top.  The two older cloudherds
riding with Aft stayed on board while he strode forward, barking
orders to hurry the soldiers along.  Only a few wind-borne words
reached Noxy, but that was enough for her to know that he was telling
the injured men to leave their gear, to leave their tents, to leave
everything they couldn't pick up *right away*.

Limping and stumbling in singles and pairs, the men began to clamber
onto Pillow's back.  A few still wore their battle masks, but most had
tied them out of the way on the backs of their helmets.  It made them
look like a doll Noxy had once seen with one happy face and one sad,
except the soldiers faces were fierce and weary.

The older cloudherds helped the worst injured, and had others move
apart to keep their weight balanced.  As they were doing this, one of
the soldiers stopped in front of Aft and began to argue, pointing at a
larger tent set up a short distance away from the others.  Other
soldiers joined in, until Aft was partly surrounded by a half-circle
of angry men.

Finally he threw up his hands in surrender.  Taking the horn from his
belt, he blew two long notes, then windmilled his arm and pointed to
Pillow.

"No no no," Grappa Gas muttered.  "You can take them all, lad, just
get them loaded up and get out of there."

"What?  What's happening?" Noxy asked.

"He wants us to come in behind him and take some of them," Grappa Gas
told her angrily.  "But look---over there!"

Something brown flashed between two trees a dozen strides into the
forest.  Something else---something much larger---briefly let itself
be seen a few strides further away.  In singles and pairs and packs,
the forest was mustering its servants.

Grappa Gas spat over Big Blue's side.  "Forest is holding back for
now," he said.  "But we go in, it'll be on us like an avalanche."

"It's not your decision to make," Granna Fee told him.  "Aft's riding
fore on this one, and---"

"---and you follow your fore.  I know, I know.  Saints."  Grappa Gas
looked like he wanted to spit again, but instead he placed his palm on
Big Blue and closed his eyes.  A moment later the cloud began to
descend.

Granna Fee looked at the three teenagers.  "You shout as soon as you
see anything, you hear me?"

"Yes, granna," Sensy said as Rash and Noxy nodded.

Five heartbeats, ten... They were level with the camp.  Grappa Gas
steered them slowly across the wind toward Pillow's side.  The
soldiers watched them approach without expression, too weak and weary
to be amazed at the sight.  "Hurry it up!" Aft bellowed at the half
dozen who had dragged long canvas-wrapped packages out of the large
tent and were staggering back through camp with them over their
shoulders.  He leaped onto Pillow.  A moment later the cloud lifted
off, clearing space for Big Blue.

The larger cloud touched down with a bump.  An instant later something
roared in the forest behind them.  Noxy jumped.  Sensy shrieked and
Grappa Gas cursed as a brown bear charged out of the trees and halted
a stone's throw away.  It reared up on its hind legs and roared again.
Another bear joined it, then a cougar, and then---

"Oh no," Noxy breathed.  There were trolls in the trees, a dozen, two,
three, a whole troop of them.  They began hooting, shaking the
branches around them until it looked like the entire forest had come
alive.

The first of the soldiers reached them.  He stumbled at the edge of
the rocky outcrop and fell forward onto Big Blue, the package on his
shoulder landing heavily beside him.  The others were right behind
him.  "Come on come on come *on*!" Grappa Gas urged them.

A stone flew through the air, then another.  Suddenly the air was full
of flying rocks.  A soldier staggered and went down as one hit his
head.  Another struck Noxy hard in the back.  She ducked and covered
her head.

"Hang on!" Grappa Gas shouted.  Big Blue surged upward so suddenly
that Noxy was knocked off her feet.

"Look out!" Rash yelled, grabbing Sensy's arm and pulling her back as
the cougar leaped up at them.  The two teens fell together in a heap
on the cloud.  The cougar snarled with disappointment as it missed the
edge of the cloud by a palm's width.

Higher, higher... Noxy let out her breath, only then realizing that
she'd been holding it.  "That was close," she said shakily.

"Too close.  Too *damned* close!"  Grappa Gas rounded on the nearest
soldier.  "We could have been dinner, all of us, and for what?  What
was so aching important you just couldn't leave it behind!?"  He poked
at the long bundle beside the soldier with his cane.

The soldier looked at him bleakly.  "Our mates.  Those as didn't make
it.  We promised we'd give 'em a decent send-off."

Grappa Gas froze, then lowered his cane.  "Ah.  Sorry, lad.  I'm
sorry."

The soldier nodded.  "Me too."  Behind them, the forest's creatures
had already started tearing every man-made thing in the camp to
pieces.
