2017-02-10 (Chapters 1-3)

A few small things. Again, it's not critical that you address any of
these yet, because the rest of the story might make the changes
moot. I liked that you emphasized the place of the Gifted animals a
little more. Maybe a little too much (the bear shouting as it rushed
them was that point for me). You switched POVs again mid-scene with
Grappa Gas and Indy in the kitchen, pg 18. I lost track of which
soldier was which when they were riding on the cloud. Maybe you can
distinguish them by some physical trait, even if Noxy doesn't know
their rank? On page 16, the second "everything happened at once"
doesn't jive in my mind's eye. To me, moving a sick man to a makeshift
stretcher is slow and controlled, not frenetic.

The Tiger is still suitably mysterious. I like him. I really want to
know more about cloud herding. The whole rebel/king thing isn't really
catching me yet, I guess because it seems so far off, even with the
soldiers in the village. Even Yestevan isn't occupying my thoughts
because I don't know what he did to deserve being shunned and how I
should feel about it. Right now my thinking is that he sounds like a
bit of an ass, so I'm okay if they leave him outside the village to be
eaten by trolls or whatever.

I'm not sure what I predict to happen next. The obvious foreshadow is
that the kings soldiers come riding through. Hm... and I bet they kill
basically everyone, and then Noxy and the tiger boy and the tiger and
Yestevan have to go to the rebel camp to join up with the rebels and
fight the king. Not sure if her friends survive yet.
