Noxy hurried to keep up with her father as Thokmay and Kulbinder fell
in behind her.  "Why did he talk like that?  It was like something out
of an old song."

"That's how everyone spoke when he first learned human language,"
Ulfmaerr answered, slowing slightly to let the others catch up.  "I
suppose he doesn't talk to humans often enough to feel he needs to
change.  Or maybe he thinks we shouldn't have changed.  He has rather
strong opinions about some things."  He stopped suddenly, looking left
and right, then gestured again.

"How long ago did he learn to talk?"  Noxy asked.

"Some time after the dragons hatched, but before the Pale conquered
Ruuda, so...six hundred years, more or less?"  Ulfmaerr paused to
study the trees again.  "This way, I think.  Though I suppose they'll
let us know if I get it wrong."  He set off once more, leaving his
daughter to her whirl of thoughts.

----------

"Grappa?" she asked disbelievingly.  The old man half-raised his hand
in a weak wave, but didn't reply.

Colonel Bonzon strode forward.  "You promised the prince, not this
girl."

The ogre snorted.  "And you promised me that your archers would end
the troll.  Yet he lives."  He raised a hand as the soldier
approached.  "Stop there!"

Colonel Bonzon halted.  "I'm not going to steal her," he said
contemptuously.

"No you're not," the ogre agreed.  "But you are wearing iron."  He
jerked his thumb over his shoulder at the forest.  "No sense drawing
attention we don't want."

Colonel Bonzon drummed his fingers on the hilt of his sword.  "As you
wish.  Now, where is the prince?"

Dragger sat down with his legs stretched out in front of him, looking
curiously childlike.  "Somewhere safe."  He picked up a rock and
studied it.  "But that could change."

Colonel Bonzon's fingers stilled.  "He's no use to either of us dead."

The ogre grunted.  "I agree.  But he could be very useful as bait."
He surged to his feet more quickly than Noxy thought a creature his
size would have been able to.  "Tell your men not to miss this time."
He turned and knuckled back into the forest without waiting for an
answer.

Noxy stood there, not knowing if she should follow him, run to Grappa
Gas, or just stay where she was.  She took a hesitant step forward.

Colonel Bonzon glanced at her, his sneer still on his face, then spun
on his heel and strode back to Grappa Gas and Pillow.  "Take me back
to the others," he ordered, climbing onto the cloud.

Grappa Gas locked eyes with Noxy and made a shushing motion with his
hands before she could speak.  Still bewildered, she stood and watched
as Pillow rose above the lake and flew away.  She thought Grappa Gas
looked back at her, but couldn't be sure.

She stood there a few strides from the dark lake, watching little
waves lap at the stones, and wondered what she was supposed to do
next.  The trolls who had kidnapped her seemed to have abandoned her.
She had no idea where she was or where her friends were, and no idea
which direction was home.  She was tired, she was hungry, and a fear
as cold as the water in front of her was rising in her throat.  Was it
too late?  Had the village's grownups been captured by the princess's
soldiers?  Was that why Grappa Gas was ferrying Colonel Bonzon around?

She wiped her eyes with her sleeve, angry at her tears.  She hated
feeling helpless.  She hated not being able to *do* anything when---

Wait.  She lowered her arm and stared at the lake without seeing it.
There *was* something she could do---something she could try,
anyway---but if it didn't work...  She pushed that thought away.  She
wasn't going to be some helpless damsel who needed to be rescued.
"*I'm* the one who does the rescuing," she said aloud.  Suddenly
furious, she bent over to pick up a stone and threw it as hard as she
could.  "Do you hear me?  *I'm* the one who does the rescuing!"

The rock made a quiet *sploosh!* when it hit the water.  Noxy turned
around and marched back to the forest.  A moment later, a dark shape
not much smaller than the ogre broke the surface.  Two eyes the size
of plates watched Noxy disappear into the trees.  The shape sighed
softly---Noxy wasn't the only one who was hungry---then sank back
unseen into the depths from which it had come.

Noxy picked a tree a dozen strides into the forest and sat down with
her back against it.  Closing her eyes, she pictured Pillow in her
mind.  She knew the old cow almost as well as she knew Big Blue.  She
woke early, and liked to scratch herself against the rocks on the
south side of the cloud pen as soon as the sun was high enough to warm
them.  She liked the rain, too---most clouds didn't like other clouds
getting them wet, but Pillow would slip underneath Big Blue or even a
passing herd and stretch herself thin to catch as many drops as she
could.

There.  Right there, that was Pillow.  She could feel the forest all
around her, pulling at her, but the cloud's familiar warm mind was
like an anchor peg set deep into stone.  As long as she held on, she
wouldn't fall and lose herself again.

She "looked" down through Pillow's senses.  She was over the forest,
not far from the lake if you didn't have to pick your way through the
trees.  Another cloud had pressed up against her.  It was Little
Beads, she realized, the one that Tasteless had been flying.  Three
pairs of boots pressed hard against Pillow's back---archers,
transferring themselves from one cloud to the other.  And there, in
the trees.  That had to be Dragger.  And the struggling shape he was
tying to that tree---that could only be Thokmay.

Noxy took a slow breath and pushed away the hungry cramp in her
stomach.  *Talk to Grappa Gas,* she told Pillow.  *Tell him, Noxy says
hello.*

*??* Pillow replied, confused.

*Tell him,* Noxy urged.

The cloud was silent for a moment, and then, *He says, what the hell?*

Noxy grinned.  *Tell him I'll explain later.  Now, here's my plan...*
