## The Return

On the fourth of Carnelian, YS 1140, a fisherman northwest of
Jalkelainan saw a ship emerge from the early morning fog.  History did
not record his name, but his blood-sworn affidavit can be found in the
archive of the Standing Committee's inquiry:

    Her timbers were weathered gray, and her sails torn and patched to
    motley.  I saw no sign of life aboard her, nor dolphins at her
    bow.  I thought her a ghost come back from the time of the Pale
    Remainder, and so made haste to harbor to sound the alarm.

Despite her battered appearance, the ship was no ghost.  She was
instead the *Unshadowed Land*: the sole survivor of an expedition that
had set out six years previously to attack the last stronghold of the
Pale Remainder half a world away.  She was also the first vessel to
circumnavigate Cherne since the end of the Age of Heroes.  As she made
her weary way toward Jalkelainan harbor, she carried eight of her
original Ruudian crew, an ex-slave from Thind, a Gifted chimpanzee,
and the Arañese missionary Costanjila di Xueres, whose prison letters
are the principal record of that epic voyage.

Jalkelainan's harbor master at the time was a practical, hardheaded
man named Kupoleva's Aardi.  Little is known of his personal life, and
nothing of his politics, but a surviving portrait shows a man with
hair cropped down to stubble, a neatly-trimmed beard, and absolutely
no sense of humor.  Born in YS 1099, he would have grown up with
stories of the rebellion that finally ended five centuries of
Remainder rule in Ruuda.  It is therefore not surprising that upon
hearing the fisherman's description of a "ghost ship", he took
immediate action.

Two cutters, each carrying twenty marines, were sent to intercept the
newcomer, with strict orders not to board.  A third, larger, vessel
was dispatched in their wake.  This ship carried a harbor pilot, a
doctress, a magician, and another squad of marines, along with a
catapult and as many barrels of pitch as the harbor master could
commandeer in half an hour.\footnote{In a subsequent suit against the
port authority, a warehouse owner claimed that two barrels of dark rum
were commandeered as well.  Unlike the pitch, they were apparently
never returned.}

The next three hours must have been tense ones for K.'s Aardi.
Jalkelainan's mayors would have descended upon him en masse, demanding
information that he didn't have, while rumors that the Pale Remainder
had returned must have spread through the town like wildfire.  One
imagines the harbor master standing on the seawall, telescope clenched
in his hand, secretly wishing that the Standing Committee's rules did
not prevent him from recruiting a few whales to act as messengers or
watchgen, as was the norm in other parts of Cherne\footnote{Many
Gifted animals had no qualms about working for the Pale Remainder:
since their flesh and blood couldn't be used to keep the Remainder
"alive", they were never required to pay the flesh-tithe.  As a
result, most Ruudians viewed the Gifted as spies and collaborators.
The hardline factions that came to power in the Fifth Rebellion's
turbulent final days banished most Gifted from Ruuda, and severed
relations with both the Parliament of Whales and the Trollthang.  It
is clear now that many informal contacts persisted, but it is unlikely
that an official in the harbor master's position would have dared to
openly violate the Standing Committee's directive.}.

The ships sent by K.'s Aardi reached the *Unshadowed Land* in
mid-morning.  With the fog gone, its crew could clearly see what the
fisherman had not: that the vessel was very solid, and her crew
unafraid of direct sunlight.  The two cutters paralleled her course as
the third ship came alongside her.  The harbor pilot's entry in
Jalkelainan's port log is almost comically understated:

    Boarded twin-spire *Unshadowed Land* (acting capt. Costanjila di
    Xueres for Cn. Tomonainan's Petta, deceased, out of Ruuda-in-Ruuda
    by way of diverse other harbors) third hour, 4 Carn. 1140.  No
    evidence plague or unalive.  Harbor fee waived.

The *Unshadowed Land*'s exhausted crew gladly relinquished their
vessel to the harbor master and his marines.  There was a brief
discussion of whether it would be better to tow her into harbor, or
let her come in under her own sail.  According to local folklore, the
harbor master decided on the former, but was then persuaded by the
doctress that the latter would be a less ignominious end to what
everyone involved must have realized was an epic achievement.  Over
the course of six years, the *Unshadowed Land* had sailed almost a
hundred thousand gallops: past the dragon's isles, Thind, and Ini
Bantang to Bell Prison on the Salt Coast, then around Cap di Perçalle
and the Ninety Kingdoms to return to Ruuda.  For the first time in
centuries, the inhabitants of northern Cherne had made direct contact
by mundane means with people they knew only as legends.

The mayors of Jalkelainen were probably just as impressed by the fact
that her cargo was enough to pay for the entire expedition.  The three
other ships she sailed with may have been lost, along with most of her
original crew, but in her hold the *Unshadowed Land* carried medicinal
pearls from the Undja Delta, gem corals from Ini Bantang, a
twentyweight of diamonds from Bell Prison, and many other treasures
and curiosities.  More importantly, her crew had brought back more
noon-grade dayglass than existed in the whole of Ruuda at the time.
Scarred and salt-starved though they might be, her crew were
potentially among their nation's wealthiest citizens.

The little convoy reached Jalkelainan shortly after noon.  A handful
of townspeople had fled in terror, but the rest flocked to the seawall
to witness the *Unshadowed Land*'s arrival.  We can only hope that
some cheered as she lay alongside the pier and made fast, for if her
crew had known what lay before them, they might well have cast off and
set sail once again.
